# [ The Delaware Code Online ](

                  /
                 "Return to The Delaware Code Online Home Page")

Toggle search __Toggle navigation

__

  * [ Laws of Delaware  Laws of   
Delaware ](https://legis.delaware.gov/SessionLaws)

  * [ Regulations  Regulations ](http://regulations.delaware.gov/)
  * [ Administrative Code  Administrative   
Code ](http://regulations.delaware.gov/AdminCode/)

  * [ Municipal Charters  Municipal   
Charters ](http://charters.delaware.gov/)

  * [FAQ](#)

[ Title 6](

                  ../index.html
                )[ Authenticated PDF ](../Title6.pdf
              )

  * [ § 12D-101](#12D-101)
  * [ § 12D-102](#12D-102)
  * [ § 12D-103](#12D-103)
  * [ § 12D-104](#12D-104)
  * [ § 12D-105](#12D-105)
  * [ § 12D-106](#12D-106)
  * [ § 12D-107](#12D-107)
  * [ § 12D-108](#12D-108)
  * [ § 12D-109](#12D-109)
  * [ § 12D-110](#12D-110)
  * [ § 12D-111](#12D-111)

#  TITLE 6

### Commerce and Trade

##  SUBTITLE II

### Other Laws Relating to Commerce and Trade

###  CHAPTER 12D. Delaware Personal Data Privacy Act

####

§ 12D-101. Short title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Delaware Personal Data
Privacy Act.”

[84 Del. Laws, c. 197, §
1](https://legis.delaware.gov/SessionLaws?volume=84&chapter=197);

  

§ 12D-102. Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

(1) “Affiliate” means a legal entity that shares common branding with another
legal entity or controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with
another legal entity. For the purposes of this paragraph, “control” or
“controlled” means any of the following:

a. Ownership of, or the power to vote, more than 50% of the outstanding shares
of any class of voting security of a legal entity.

b. Control in any manner over the election of a majority of the directors or
of individuals exercising similar functions.

c. The power to exercise controlling influence over the management of a legal
entity.

(2) “Authenticate” means to use reasonable means to determine that a request
to exercise any of the rights afforded under § 12D-104(a)(1) to (a)(4) of this
title, inclusive, is being made by, or on behalf of, the consumer who is
entitled to exercise such consumer rights with respect to the personal data at
issue.

(3) “Biometric data” means data generated by automatic measurements of an
individual’s unique biological characteristics, such as a fingerprint, a
voiceprint, eye retinas, irises, or other unique biological patterns or
characteristics that are used to identify a specific individual. “Biometric
data” does not include any of the following:

a. A digital or physical photograph.

b. An audio or video recording.

c. Any data generated from a digital or physical photograph, or an audio or
video recording, unless such data is generated to identify a specific
individual.

(4) “Business associate” means as defined in HIPAA.

(5) “Child” means as defined in COPPA.

(6) “Child abuse” means, with respect to an individual under 18 years of age,
as defined in § 901(1) of Title 10, or any equivalent provision in the laws of
any other state, the United States, any territory, district, or subdivision of
the United States, or any foreign jurisdiction.

(7) “Consent” means a clear affirmative act signifying a consumer’s freely
given, specific, informed and unambiguous agreement to allow the processing of
personal data relating to the consumer. “Consent” may include a written
statement, including by electronic means, or any other unambiguous affirmative
action. “Consent” does not include any of the following:

a. Acceptance of a general or broad terms of use or similar document that
contains descriptions of personal data processing along with other, unrelated
information.

b. Hovering over, muting, pausing, or closing a given piece of content.

c. Agreement obtained through the use of dark patterns.

(8) “Consumer” means an individual who is a resident of this State. “Consumer”
does not include an individual acting in a commercial or employment context or
as an employee, owner, director, officer, or contractor of a company,
partnership, sole proprietorship, nonprofit organization, or government agency
whose communications or transactions with the controller occur solely within
the context of that individual’s role with the company, partnership, sole
proprietorship, nonprofit organization, or government agency.

(9) “Controller” means a person that, alone or jointly with others, determines
the purpose and means of processing personal data.

(10) “COPPA” means the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998, 15
U.S.C. § 6501, et seq., and the regulations, rules, guidance, and exemptions
adopted pursuant to said act, as said act and such regulations, rules,
guidance, and exemptions may be amended.

(11) “Covered entity” means as defined in HIPAA.

(12) “Dark pattern” means any of the following:

a. A user interface designed or manipulated with the substantial effect of
subverting or impairing user autonomy, decision-making, or choice.

b. Any other practice the Federal Trade Commission refers to as a “dark
pattern.”

(13) “Decisions that produce legal or similarly significant effects concerning
the consumer” means decisions made by the controller that result in the
provision or denial by the controller of financial or lending services,
housing, insurance, education enrollment or opportunity, criminal justice,
employment opportunities, health-care services, or access to essential goods
or services.

(14) “De-identified data” means data that cannot reasonably be used to infer
information about, or otherwise be linked to, an identified or identifiable
individual, or a device linked to such individual, if the controller that
possesses such data does all of the following:

a. Takes reasonable measures to ensure that such data cannot be associated
with an individual.

b. Publicly commits to process such data only in a de-identified fashion and
not attempt to re-identify such data.

c. Contractually obligates any recipients of such data to comply with all of
the provisions of this chapter applicable to the controller with respect to
such data.

(15) “Domestic violence” means as defined in § 1041 of Title 10, or any
equivalent provision in the laws of any other state, the United States, any
territory, district, or subdivision of the United States, or any foreign
jurisdiction.

(16) “Genetic data” means any data, regardless of its format, that results
from the analysis of a biological sample of an individual, or from another
source enabling equivalent information to be obtained, and concerns genetic
material. For purposes of this paragraph, “genetic material” includes
deoxyribonucleic acids (DNA), ribonucleic acids (RNA), genes, chromosomes,
alleles, genomes, alterations or modifications to DNA or RNA, single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), uninterpreted data that results from analysis
of the biological sample or other source, and any information extrapolated,
derived, or inferred therefrom.

(17) “HIPAA” means the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996, 42 U.S.C. § 1320d, et seq., as amended.

(18) “Human trafficking” means the offense defined in § 787 of Title 11, or
any equivalent provision in the laws of any other state, the United States,
any territory, district, or subdivision of the United States, or any foreign
jurisdiction.

(19) “Identified or identifiable individual” means an individual who can be
readily identified, directly or indirectly.

(20) “Nonprofit organization” means any organization that is exempt from
taxation under § 501(c)(3), (c)(4), (c)(6) or (c)(12) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986 [26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3), (c)(4), (c)(6) or (c)(12)], or any
subsequent corresponding internal revenue code of the United States, as
amended.

(21) “Personal data” means any information that is linked or reasonably
linkable to an identified or identifiable individual, and does not include de-
identified data or publicly available information.

(22) “Precise geolocation data” means information derived from technology,
including global positioning system level latitude and longitude coordinates
or other mechanisms, that directly identifies the specific location of an
individual with precision and accuracy within a radius of 1,750 feet. “Precise
geolocation data” does not include the content of communications or any data
generated by or connected to advanced utility metering infrastructure systems
or equipment for use by a utility.

(23) “Process” or “processing” means any operation or set of operations
performed, whether by manual or automated means, on personal data or on sets
of personal data, such as the collection, use, storage, disclosure, analysis,
deletion, or modification of personal data.

(24) “Processor” means a person that processes personal data on behalf of a
controller.

(25) “Profiling” means any form of automated processing performed on personal
data to evaluate, analyze, or predict personal aspects related to an
identified or identifiable individual’s economic situation, health,
demographic characteristics, personal preferences, interests, reliability,
behavior, location, or movements.

(26) “Protected health information” means as defined in HIPAA.

(27) “Pseudonymous data” means personal data that cannot be attributed to a
specific individual without the use of additional information, provided such
additional information is kept separately and is subject to appropriate
technical and organizational measures to ensure that the personal data is not
attributed to an identified or identifiable individual.

(28) “Publicly available information” means any of the following:

a. Information that is lawfully made available through federal, state, or
local government records.

b. Information that a controller has a reasonable basis to believe that the
consumer has lawfully made available to the general public through widely
distributed media.

(29) “Sale of personal data” means the exchange of personal data for monetary
or other valuable consideration by the controller to a third party. “Sale of
personal data” does not include any of the following:

a. The disclosure of personal data to a processor that processes the personal
data on behalf of the controller where limited to the purpose of such
processing.

b. The disclosure of personal data to a third party for purposes of providing
a product or service affirmatively requested by the consumer.

c. The disclosure or transfer of personal data to an affiliate of the
controller.

d. The disclosure of personal data where the consumer directs the controller
to disclose the personal data or intentionally uses the controller to interact
with a third party.

e. The disclosure of personal data that the consumer intentionally made
available to the general public via a channel of mass media, and did not
restrict to a specific audience.

f. The disclosure or transfer of personal data to a third party as an asset
that is part of a merger, acquisition, bankruptcy, or other similar
transaction in which the third party assumes control of all or part of the
controller’s assets, or a proposed merger, acquisition, bankruptcy, or other
similar transaction in which the third party assumes control of all or part of
the controller’s assets.

(30) “Sensitive data” means personal data that includes any of the following:

a. Data revealing racial or ethnic origin, religious beliefs, mental or
physical health condition or diagnosis (including pregnancy), sex life, sexual
orientation, status as transgender or nonbinary, citizenship status, or
immigration status.

b. Genetic or biometric data.

c. Personal data of a known child.

d. Precise geolocation data.

(31) “Sexual assault” means any of the offenses defined in §§ 768 to 780 and §
787 of Title 11, or any equivalent provision in the laws of any other state,
the United States, any territory, district, or subdivision of the United
States, or any foreign jurisdiction.

(32) “Stalking” means the offense defined in § 1312 of Title 11, or any
equivalent provision in the laws of any other state, the United States, any
territory, district, or subdivision of the United States, or any foreign
jurisdiction.

(33) “Targeted advertising” means displaying advertisements to a consumer
where the advertisement is selected based on personal data obtained or
inferred from that consumer’s activities over time and across nonaffiliated
Internet websites or online applications to predict such consumer’s
preferences or interests. “Targeted advertising” does not include any of the
following:

a. Advertisements based on activities within a controller’s own Internet
websites or online applications.

b. Advertisements based on the context of a consumer’s current search query,
visit to an Internet website, or online application.

c. Advertisements directed to a consumer in direct response to the consumer’s
request for information or feedback.

d. Processing personal data solely to measure or report advertising frequency,
performance, or reach.

(34) “Third party” means, with respect to personal data controlled by a
controller, any person other than the relevant consumer, the controller of
such personal data, or a processor or an affiliate of the processor or the
controller.

(35) “Trade secret” means as defined in § 2001(4) of this title.

(36) “Violent felony” means as defined in § 4201 of Title 11 and includes any
equivalent provision in the laws of any other state, the United States, and
territory, district, or subdivision of the United States, or any foreign
jurisdiction.

[84 Del. Laws, c. 197, §
1](https://legis.delaware.gov/SessionLaws?volume=84&chapter=197);

  

§ 12D-103. Applicability of chapter.

(a) This chapter applies to persons that conduct business in the State or
persons that produce products or services that are targeted to residents of
the State and that during the preceding calendar year did any of the
following:

(1) Controlled or processed the personal data of not less than 35,000
consumers, excluding personal data controlled or processed solely for the
purpose of completing a payment transaction.

(2) Controlled or processed the personal data of not less than 10,000
consumers and derived more than 20% of their gross revenue from the sale of
personal data.

(b) This chapter does not apply to any of the following entities:

(1) Any regulatory, administrative, advisory, executive, appointive,
legislative, or judicial body of the State or a political subdivision of the
State, including any board, bureau, commission, agency of the State or a
political subdivision of the State, but excluding any institution of higher
education.

(2) Any financial institution or affiliate of a financial institution, all as
defined in 15 U.S.C. § 6809, to the extent that the financial institution or
affiliate is subject to Title V of the Gramm Leach Bliley Act (15 U.S.C. §
6801, et seq., as amended) and the rules and implementing regulations
promulgated thereunder.

(3) Any nonprofit organization dedicated exclusively to preventing and
addressing insurance crime.

(4) A national securities association registered pursuant to § 15A of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78o-3, as amended) and the rules
and implementing regulations promulgated thereunder, or a registered futures
association so designated pursuant to § 17 of the Commodity Exchange Act (7
U.S.C. § 21, as amended) and the rules and implementing regulations
promulgated thereunder.

(c) This chapter does not apply to the following information and data:

(1) Protected health information under HIPAA.

(2) Patient-identifying information for purposes of 42 U.S.C. § 290dd-2.

(3) Identifiable private information, as defined in 45 C.F.R. § 46.102, to the
extent that it is used for purposes of the federal policy for the protection
of human subjects pursuant to 45 C.F.R. Part 46.

(4) Identifiable private information to the extent it is collected and used as
part of human subjects research pursuant to the ICH E6 Good Clinical Practice
Guideline issued by the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical
Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use or the protection of human
subjects under 21 C.F.R. Parts 50 and 56.

(5) Patient safety work product, as defined in 42 C.F.R. § 3.20, that is
created and used for purposes of patient safety improvement pursuant to 42
C.F.R. Part 3, established pursuant to 42 U.S.C. §§ 299b-21 to 299b-26.

(6) Information to the extent it is used for public health, community health,
or population health activities and purposes, as authorized by HIPAA, when
provided by or to a covered entity or when provided by or to a business
associate pursuant to a business associate agreement with a covered entity.

(7) The collection, maintenance, disclosure, sale, communication, or use of
any personal information bearing on a consumer’s credit worthiness, credit
standing, credit capacity, character, general reputation, personal
characteristics, or mode of living by a consumer reporting agency, furnisher,
or user that provides information for use in a consumer report, and by a user
of a consumer report, but only to the extent that such activity is regulated
by and authorized under the federal Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. §
1681, et seq., as amended).

(8) Personal data collected, processed, sold, or disclosed in compliance with
the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act of 1994, 18 U.S.C. § 2721, et seq., as
amended.

(9) Personal data regulated by the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act,
20 U.S.C. § 1232g, et seq., as amended.

(10) Personal data collected, processed, sold, or disclosed in compliance with
the Farm Credit Act, 12 U.S.C. § 2001, et seq., as amended.

(11) Data processed or maintained in any of the following ways:

a. In the course of an individual applying to, employed by, or acting as an
agent or independent contractor of a controller, processor, or third party, to
the extent that the data is collected and used within the context of that
role.

b. As the emergency contact information of an individual, used for emergency
contact purposes.

c. Necessary to retain to administer benefits for another individual relating
to the individual who is the subject of the information under paragraph
(c)(11)a. of this section and used for the purposes of administering such
benefits.

(12) Personal data collected, processed, sold, or disclosed in relation to
price, route, or service, as such terms are used in the Airline Deregulation
Act, 49 U.S.C. § 40101, et seq., as amended, by an air carrier subject to said
act, to the extent any part of this chapter is preempted by the Airline
Deregulation Act, 49 U.S.C. § 41713, as amended.

(13) Personal data of a victim of or witness to child abuse, domestic
violence, human trafficking, sexual assault, violent felony, or stalking that
is collected, processed, or maintained by a nonprofit organization that
provides services to victims of or witnesses to child abuse, domestic
violence, human trafficking, sexual assault, violent felony, or stalking.

(14) Data subject to Title V of the Gramm Leach Bliley Act (15 U.S.C. § 6801,
et. seq., as amended) and the rules and implementing regulations promulgated
thereunder.

(d) Controllers and processors that comply with the verifiable parental
consent requirements of COPPA shall be deemed compliant with any obligation to
obtain parental consent set forth in this chapter with respect to a consumer
who is a child.

[84 Del. Laws, c. 197, §
1](https://legis.delaware.gov/SessionLaws?volume=84&chapter=197);

  

§ 12D-104. Consumer personal data rights.

(a) A consumer has the right to do all of the following:

(1) Confirm whether a controller is processing the consumer’s personal data
and access such personal data, unless such confirmation or access would
require the controller to reveal a trade secret.

(2) Correct inaccuracies in the consumer’s personal data, taking into account
the nature of the personal data and the purposes of the processing of the
consumer’s personal data.

(3) Delete personal data provided by, or obtained about, the consumer.

(4) Obtain a copy of the consumer’s personal data processed by the controller,
in a portable and, to the extent technically feasible, readily-usable format
that allows the consumer to transmit the data to another controller without
hindrance, where the processing is carried out by automated means, provided
such controller shall not be required to reveal any trade secret.

(5) Obtain a list of the categories of third parties to which the controller
has disclosed the consumer’s personal data.

(6) Opt out of the processing of the personal data for purposes of any of the
following:

a. Targeted advertising.

b. The sale of personal data, except as provided in § 12D-106(b) of this
title.

c. Profiling in furtherance of solely-automated decisions that produce legal
or similarly significant effects concerning the consumer.

(b) A consumer may exercise rights under this section by a secure and reliable
means established by the controller and described to the consumer in the
controller’s privacy notice. A consumer may designate an authorized agent in
accordance with § 12D-105 of this title to exercise the rights of such
consumer to opt out of the processing of such consumer’s personal data for
purposes of paragraph (a)(6) of this section on behalf of the consumer. In the
case of processing personal data of a known child, the parent or legal
guardian may exercise such consumer rights on the child’s behalf. In the case
of processing personal data concerning a consumer subject to a guardianship,
conservatorship or other protective arrangement, the guardian or the
conservator of the consumer may exercise such rights on the consumer’s behalf.

(c) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a controller shall comply
with a request by a consumer to exercise the consumer rights authorized
pursuant to said sections as follows:

(1) A controller shall respond to the consumer without undue delay, but not
later than 45 days after receipt of the request. The controller may extend the
response period by 45 additional days when reasonably necessary, considering
the complexity and number of the consumer’s requests, provided the controller
informs the consumer of any such extension within the initial 45-day response
period and of the reason for the extension.

(2) If a controller declines to take action regarding the consumer’s request,
the controller shall inform the consumer without undue delay, but not later
than 45 days after receipt of the request, of the justification for declining
to take action and instructions for how to appeal the decision.

(3) Information provided in response to a consumer request shall be provided
by a controller, free of charge, once per consumer during any 12-month period.
If requests from a consumer are manifestly unfounded, excessive or repetitive,
the controller may charge the consumer a reasonable fee to cover the
administrative costs of complying with the request or decline to act on the
request. The controller bears the burden of demonstrating the manifestly
unfounded, excessive or repetitive nature of the request.

(4) If a controller is unable to authenticate a request to exercise any of the
rights afforded under paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(5) of this section,
inclusive, using commercially-reasonable efforts, the controller shall not be
required to comply with a request to initiate an action pursuant to this
section and shall provide notice to the consumer that the controller is unable
to authenticate the request to exercise such right or rights until such
consumer provides additional information reasonably necessary to authenticate
such consumer and such consumer’s request to exercise such right or rights. A
controller shall not be required to authenticate an opt-out request, but a
controller may deny an opt-out request if the controller has a good faith,
reasonable, and documented belief that such request is fraudulent. If a
controller denies an opt-out request because the controller believes such
request is fraudulent, the controller shall send a notice to the person who
made such request disclosing that such controller believes such request is
fraudulent, why such controller believes such request is fraudulent, and that
such controller shall not comply with such request.

(5) A controller that has obtained personal data about a consumer from a
source other than the consumer shall be deemed in compliance with a consumer’s
request to delete such data pursuant to paragraph (a)(3) of this section if
the controller retains a record of the deletion request and the minimum data
necessary for the purpose of ensuring the consumer’s personal data remains
deleted from the controller’s records and does not use such retained data for
any other purpose.

(d) A controller shall establish a process for a consumer to appeal the
controller’s refusal to take action on a request within a reasonable period of
time after the consumer’s receipt of the decision. The appeal process shall be
conspicuously available and similar to the process for submitting requests to
initiate action pursuant to this section. Not later than 60 days after receipt
of an appeal, a controller shall inform the consumer in writing of any action
taken or not taken in response to the appeal, including a written explanation
of the reasons for the decisions. If the appeal is denied, the controller
shall also provide the consumer with an online mechanism, if available, or
other method through which the consumer may contact the Department of Justice
to submit a complaint.

[84 Del. Laws, c. 197, §
1](https://legis.delaware.gov/SessionLaws?volume=84&chapter=197);

  

§ 12D-105. Designation of agent to exercise rights of consumer, including
through universal opt-out mechanisms.

(a) A consumer may designate an authorized agent to act on the consumer’s
behalf to opt out of the processing of such consumer’s personal data for 1 or
more of the purposes specified in § 12D-104(a)(6) of this title. The consumer
may designate such authorized agent by way of, among other things, a platform,
technology, or mechanism, including an Internet link or a browser setting,
browser extension, or global device setting, indicating such consumer’s intent
to opt out of such processing. For the purposes of such designation, the
platform, technology, or mechanism may function as the agent for purposes of
conveying the consumer’s decision to opt-out.

(b) A controller shall comply with an opt-out request received from an
authorized agent if the controller is able to verify, with commercially-
reasonable effort, the identity of the consumer and the authorized agent’s
authority to act on such consumer’s behalf. The Department of Justice may
publish or reference on its website a list of agents who presumptively shall
have such authority unless the controller has established a reasonable basis
to conclude that the agent lacks such authority.

[84 Del. Laws, c. 197, §
1](https://legis.delaware.gov/SessionLaws?volume=84&chapter=197);

  

§ 12D-106. Duties of controllers.

(a) A controller shall do all of the following:

(1) Limit the collection of personal data to what is adequate, relevant, and
reasonably necessary in relation to the purposes for which such data is
processed, as disclosed to the consumer.

(2) Except as otherwise permitted by this chapter, not process personal data
for purposes that are neither reasonably necessary to, nor compatible with,
the disclosed purposes for which such personal data is processed, as disclosed
to the consumer, unless the controller obtains the consumer’s consent.

(3) Establish, implement, and maintain reasonable administrative, technical,
and physical data security practices to protect the confidentiality,
integrity, and accessibility of personal data appropriate to the volume and
nature of the personal data at issue.

(4) Not process sensitive data concerning a consumer without obtaining the
consumer’s consent, or, in the case of the processing of sensitive data
concerning a known child, without first obtaining consent from the child’s
parent or lawful guardian and otherwise complying with § 1204C of this title.

(5) Not process personal data in violation of the laws of this State and
federal laws that prohibit unlawful discrimination.

(6) Provide an effective mechanism for a consumer to revoke the consumer’s
consent under this section that is at least as easy as the mechanism by which
the consumer provided the consumer’s consent and, upon revocation of such
consent, cease to process the data as soon as practicable, but not later than
15 days after the receipt of such request.

(7) Not process the personal data of a consumer for purposes of targeted
advertising, or sell the consumer’s personal data without the consumer’s
consent, under circumstances where a controller has actual knowledge or
wilfully disregards that the consumer is at least 13 years of age but younger
than 18 years of age.

(8) Not discriminate against a consumer for exercising any of the consumer
rights contained in this chapter, including denying goods or services,
charging different prices or rates for goods or services, or providing a
different level of quality of goods or services to the consumer.

(b) Nothing in subsection (a) of this section shall be construed to require a
controller to provide a product or service that requires the personal data of
a consumer which the controller does not collect or maintain, or prohibit a
controller from offering a different price, rate, level, quality, or selection
of goods or services to a consumer, including offering goods or services for
no fee, if the offering is in connection with a consumer’s voluntary
participation in a bona fide loyalty, rewards, premium features, discounts, or
club card program.

(c) A controller shall provide consumers with a reasonably accessible, clear,
and meaningful privacy notice that includes all of the following:

(1) The categories of personal data processed by the controller.

(2) The purpose for processing personal data.

(3) How consumers may exercise their consumer rights, including how a consumer
may appeal a controller’s decision with regard to the consumer’s request.

(4) The categories of personal data that the controller shares with third
parties, if any.

(5) The categories of third parties with which the controller shares personal
data, if any.

(6) An active electronic mail address or other online mechanism that the
consumer may use to contact the controller.

(d) If a controller sells personal data to third parties or processes personal
data for targeted advertising, the controller shall clearly and conspicuously
disclose such processing, as well as the manner in which a consumer may
exercise the right to opt out of such processing.

(e) (1) A controller shall establish, and shall describe in the privacy notice
required by subsection (c) of this section, 1 or more secure and reliable
means for consumers to submit a request to exercise their consumer rights
pursuant to this chapter. Such means shall take into account the ways in which
consumers normally interact with the controller, the need for secure and
reliable communication of such requests, and the ability of the controller to
verify the identity of the consumer making the request. A controller shall not
require a consumer to create a new account in order to exercise consumer
rights, but may require a consumer or the consumer’s authorized agent to use
an existing account. Any such means shall include all of the following:

a.1. Providing a clear and conspicuous link on the controller’s Internet
website to an Internet web page that enables a consumer, or an agent of the
consumer, to opt out of the targeted advertising or the sale of the consumer’s
personal data.

2\. Not later than January 1, 2026, allowing a consumer to opt out of any
processing of the consumer’s personal data for the purposes of targeted
advertising, or any sale of such personal data, through an opt-out preference
signal sent, with such consumer’s consent, by a platform, technology, or
mechanism to the controller indicating such consumer’s intent to opt out of
any such processing or sale. Such platform, technology, or mechanism shall do
all of the following:

A. Not unfairly disadvantage another controller.

B. Not make use of a default setting, but, rather, require the consumer to
make an affirmative, freely given, and unambiguous choice to opt out of any
processing of such consumer’s personal data pursuant to this chapter.

C. Be consumer friendly and easy to use by the average consumer.

D. Be as consistent as possible with any other similar platform, technology,
or mechanism required by any federal or state law or regulation.

E. Enable the controller to reasonably determine whether the consumer is a
resident of the State and whether the consumer has made a legitimate request
to opt out of any sale of such consumer’s personal data or targeted
advertising.

b. If a consumer’s decision to opt out of any processing of the consumer’s
personal data for the purposes of targeted advertising, or any sale of such
personal data, through an opt-out preference signal sent in accordance with
the provisions of paragraph (e)(1)a. of this section conflicts with the
consumer’s existing controller-specific privacy setting or voluntary
participation in a controller’s bona fide loyalty, rewards, premium features,
discounts or club card program, the controller shall comply with such
consumer’s opt-out preference signal but may notify such consumer of such
conflict and provide to such consumer the choice to confirm such controller-
specific privacy setting or participation in such program.

(2) If a controller responds to consumer opt-out requests received pursuant to
paragraph (e)(1)a. of this section by informing the consumer of a charge for
the use of any product or service, the controller shall present the terms of
any financial incentive offered pursuant to paragraph (e)(1)b. of this section
for the retention, use, sale, or sharing of the consumer’s personal data.

[84 Del. Laws, c. 197, §
1](https://legis.delaware.gov/SessionLaws?volume=84&chapter=197);

  

§ 12D-107. Duties of processors.

(a) A processor shall adhere to the instructions of a controller and shall
assist the controller in meeting the controller’s obligations under this
chapter. Such assistance must include all of the following:

(1) Taking into account the nature of processing and the information available
to the processor, by appropriate technical and organizational measures,
insofar as is reasonably practicable, to fulfill the controller’s obligation
to respond to consumer rights requests.

(2) Taking into account the nature of processing and the information available
to the processor, by assisting the controller in meeting the controller’s
obligations in relation to the security of processing the personal data and in
relation to the notification of a “breach of security,” as defined in §
12B-101(1) this title, of the system of the processor, in order to meet the
controller’s obligations.

(3) Providing necessary information to enable the controller to conduct and
document data protection assessments.

(b) A contract between a controller and a processor must govern the
processor’s data processing procedures with respect to processing performed on
behalf of the controller. The contract must be binding and clearly set forth
instructions for processing data, the nature and purpose of processing, the
type of data subject to processing, the duration of processing and the rights
and obligations of both parties. The contract must also require that the
processor do all of the following:

(1) Ensure that each person processing personal data is subject to a duty of
confidentiality with respect to the data.

(2) At the controller’s direction, delete or return all personal data to the
controller as requested at the end of the provision of services, unless
retention of the personal data is required by law.

(3) Upon the reasonable request of the controller, make available to the
controller all information in its possession necessary to demonstrate the
processor’s compliance with the obligations in this chapter.

(4) After providing the controller an opportunity to object, engage any
subcontractor pursuant to a written contract that requires the subcontractor
to meet the obligations of the processor with respect to the personal data.

(5) Allow, and cooperate with, reasonable assessments by the controller or the
controller’s designated assessor, or the processor may arrange for a qualified
and independent assessor to conduct an assessment of the processor’s policies
and technical and organizational measures in support of the obligations under
this chapter, using an appropriate and accepted control standard or framework
and assessment procedure for such assessments. The processor shall provide a
report of such assessment to the controller upon request.

(c) Nothing in this section may be construed to relieve a controller or
processor from the liabilities imposed on the controller or processor by
virtue of such controller’s or processor’s role in the processing
relationship, as described in this chapter.

(d) Determining whether a person is acting as a controller or processor with
respect to a specific processing of data is a fact-based determination that
depends upon the context in which personal data is to be processed. A person
who is not limited in such person’s processing of personal data pursuant to a
controller’s instructions, or who fails to adhere to such instructions, is a
controller and not a processor with respect to a specific processing of data.
A processor that continues to adhere to a controller’s instructions with
respect to a specific processing of personal data remains a processor. If a
processor begins, alone or jointly with others, determining the purposes and
means of the processing of personal data, the processor is a controller with
respect to such processing and may be subject to an enforcement action under
this chapter.

[84 Del. Laws, c. 197, §
1](https://legis.delaware.gov/SessionLaws?volume=84&chapter=197);

  

§ 12D-108. Data protection assessments.

(a) A controller that controls or processes the data of not less than 100,000
consumers, excluding data controlled or processed solely for the purpose of
completing a payment transaction, shall conduct and document, on a regular
basis, a data protection assessment for each of the controller’s processing
activities that presents a heightened risk of harm to a consumer. For the
purposes of this section, processing that presents a heightened risk of harm
to a consumer includes any of the following:

(1) The processing of personal data for the purposes of targeted advertising.

(2) The sale of personal data.

(3) The processing of personal data for the purposes of profiling, where such
profiling presents a reasonably foreseeable risk of any of the following:

a. Unfair or deceptive treatment of, or unlawful disparate impact on,
consumers.

b. Financial, physical, or reputational injury to consumers.

c. A physical or other intrusion upon the solitude or seclusion, or the
private affairs or concerns, of consumers, where such intrusion would be
offensive to a reasonable person.

d. Other substantial injury to consumers.

(4) The processing of sensitive data.

(b) Data protection assessments conducted pursuant to subsection (a) of this
section shall identify and weigh the benefits that may flow, directly and
indirectly, from the processing to the controller, the consumer, other
stakeholders and the public against the potential risks to the rights of the
consumer associated with such processing, as mitigated by safeguards that can
be employed by the controller to reduce such risks. The controller shall
factor into any such data protection assessment the use of de-identified data
and the reasonable expectations of consumers, as well as the context of the
processing and the relationship between the controller and the consumer whose
personal data will be processed.

(c) The Attorney General may require that a controller disclose any data
protection assessment that is relevant to an investigation conducted by the
Attorney General, and the controller shall make the data protection assessment
available to the Attorney General. The Attorney General may evaluate the data
protection assessment for compliance with the responsibilities set forth in
this chapter. Data protection assessments must be treated as confidential and
are not public records within the meaning of § 10002(o) of Title 29.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a controller’s data protection assessment may
be used in an action to enforce this chapter. To the extent any information
contained in a data protection assessment disclosed to the Attorney General
includes and conspicuously identifies information subject to attorney-client
privilege or work product protection, such disclosure by itself does not
constitute a waiver of such privilege or protection.

(d) A single data protection assessment may address a comparable set of
processing operations that include similar activities.

(e) If a controller conducts a data protection assessment for the purpose of
complying with another applicable law or regulation, the data protection
assessment shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements established in this
section if such data protection assessment is reasonably similar in scope and
effect to the data protection assessment that would otherwise be conducted
pursuant to this section.

(f) Data protection assessment requirements shall apply to processing
activities created or generated on or after July 1, 2025, and are not
retroactive.

[84 Del. Laws, c. 197, §
1](https://legis.delaware.gov/SessionLaws?volume=84&chapter=197);

  

§ 12D-109. De-identified data.

(a) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require a controller or
processor to re-identify de-identified data or pseudonymous data, or to
maintain data in identifiable form, or collect, obtain, retain, or access any
data or technology, in order to be capable of associating an authenticated
consumer request with personal data.

(b) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require a controller or
processor to comply with an authenticated consumer rights request if all of
the following apply:

(1) The controller is not reasonably capable of associating the request with
the personal data or it would be unreasonably burdensome for the controller to
associate the request with the personal data.

(2) The controller does not use the personal data to recognize or respond to
the specific consumer who is the subject of the personal data, or associate
the personal data with other personal data about the same specific consumer.

(3) The controller does not sell the personal data to any third party or
otherwise voluntarily disclose the personal data to any third party other than
a processor, except as otherwise permitted in this section.

(c) The rights afforded under § 12D-104(a)(1) to (a)(4) of this title,
inclusive, do not apply to pseudonymous data in cases where the controller is
able to demonstrate that any information necessary to identify the consumer is
kept separately and is subject to effective technical and organizational
controls that prevent the controller from accessing such information.

(d) A controller that discloses pseudonymous data or de-identified data shall
exercise reasonable oversight to monitor compliance with any contractual
commitments to which the pseudonymous data or de-identified data is subject
and shall take appropriate steps to address any breaches of those contractual
commitments. The determination of the reasonableness of such oversight and the
appropriateness of contractual enforcement must take into account whether the
disclosed data includes data that would be sensitive data if it were re-
identified.

[84 Del. Laws, c. 197, §
1](https://legis.delaware.gov/SessionLaws?volume=84&chapter=197);

  

§ 12D-110. Exclusions.

(a) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to restrict a controller’s or
processor’s ability to do any of the following:

(1) Comply with federal, state, or local laws, rules, or regulations.

(2) Comply with a civil, criminal, or regulatory inquiry, investigation,
subpoena, or summons by federal, state, local, or other governmental
authorities.

(3) Cooperate with law-enforcement agencies concerning conduct or activity
that the controller or processor reasonably and in good faith believes may
violate federal, state, or local laws, rules, or regulations.

(4) Investigate, establish, exercise, prepare for, or defend legal claims.

(5) Provide a product or service specifically requested by a consumer.

(6) Perform under a contract to which a consumer is a party, including
fulfilling the terms of a written warranty.

(7) Take steps at the request of a consumer prior to entering into a contract.

(8) Take immediate steps to protect an interest that is essential for the life
or physical safety of the consumer or another individual, and where the
processing cannot be manifestly based on another legal basis.

(9) Prevent, detect, protect against, or respond to security incidents,
identity theft, fraud, harassment, malicious or deceptive activities, or any
illegal activity, preserve the integrity or security of systems, or
investigate, report or prosecute those responsible for any such activity.

(10) Engage in public or peer-reviewed scientific research in the public
interest that adheres to all other applicable ethics and privacy laws and is
approved, monitored, and governed by an institutional review board that
determines whether the deletion of the information is likely to provide
substantial benefits that do not exclusively accrue to the controller, the
expected benefits of the research outweigh the privacy risks, and whether the
controller has implemented reasonable safeguards to mitigate privacy risks
associated with research, including any risks associated with re-
identification.

(11) Assist another controller, processor, or third party with any of the
activities under this subsection.

(b) The obligations imposed on controllers or processors under this chapter,
other than those imposed by § 12D-109 of this title, do not restrict a
controller’s or processor’s ability to collect consumer data, or use or retain
such data, for internal use only, to do any of the following:

(1) Conduct internal research to develop, improve or repair products, services
or technology.

(2) Effectuate a product recall.

(3) Identify and repair technical errors that impair existing or intended
functionality.

(4) Perform internal operations that are reasonably aligned with the
expectations of the consumer or reasonably anticipated based on the consumer’s
existing relationship with the controller, or are otherwise compatible with
processing data in furtherance of the provision of a product or service
specifically requested by a consumer or the performance of a contract to which
the consumer is a party.

(c) The obligations imposed on controllers or processors under this chapter
shall not apply where compliance by the controller or processor with said
sections would violate an evidentiary privilege under the laws of this State.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent a controller or
processor from providing personal data concerning a consumer to a person
covered by an evidentiary privilege under the laws of this State as part of a
privileged communication.

(d) A controller or processor that discloses personal data to a processor or
third-party controller in compliance with this chapter shall not be deemed to
have violated this chapter if the processor or third-party controller that
receives and processes such personal data violates this chapter, provided
that:

(1) At the time the disclosing controller or processor disclosed such personal
data, the disclosing controller or processor did not have actual knowledge
that the receiving processor or third-party controller had violated or would
violate this chapter; and

(2) The disclosing controller or processor was, and remained, in compliance
with its obligations as the discloser of such data hereunder.

A third-party controller or processor receiving personal data from a
controller or processor in compliance with this chapter is likewise not in
violation of this chapterfor the independent misconduct of the controller or
processor from which such third-party controller or processor receives such
personal data.

(e) Nothing in this chapter may be construed to do any of the following:

(1) Impose any obligation on a controller or processor that adversely affects
the rights of any person to freedom of speech or freedom of the press
guaranteed in the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or § 5 of
Article I of the Delaware Constitution of 1897.

(2) Apply to any person’s processing of personal data in the course of such
person’s purely personal or household activities.

(f) Personal data processed pursuant to this section may be processed to the
extent that such processing is reasonably necessary and proportionate to the
purposes listed in this section, and is adequate, relevant, and limited to
what is necessary in relation to the specific purposes listed in this section.
Personal data collected, used, or retained pursuant to subsection (b) of this
section shall, where applicable, take into account the nature and purpose or
purposes of such collection, use, or retention. Such data shall be subject to
reasonable administrative, technical, and physical measures to protect the
confidentiality, integrity, and accessibility of the personal data and to
reduce reasonably foreseeable risks of harm to consumers relating to such
collection, use, or retention of personal data.

(g) If a controller processes personal data pursuant to an exemption in this
section, the controller bears the burden of demonstrating that such processing
qualifies for the exemption and complies with the requirements in subsection
(f) of this section.

(h) Processing personal data for the purposes expressly identified in this
section shall not solely make a legal entity a controller with respect to such
processing.

[84 Del. Laws, c. 197, §
1](https://legis.delaware.gov/SessionLaws?volume=84&chapter=197);

  

§ 12D-111. Enforcement.

(a) The Department of Justice has enforcement authority over this chapter and
may investigate and prosecute violations of this chapter in accordance with
the provisions of subchapter II of Chapter 25 of Title 29.

(b) During the period beginning on January 1, 2025, and ending on December 31,
2025, the Department of Justice shall, prior to initiating any action for a
violation of any provision of this chapter, issue a notice of violation to the
controller if the Department of Justice determines that a cure is possible. If
the controller fails to cure such violation within 60 days of receipt of the
notice of violation, the Department of Justice may bring an enforcement
proceeding pursuant to subsection (a) of this section.

(c) Beginning on January 1, 2026, the Department of Justice may, in
determining whether to grant a controller or processor the opportunity to cure
an alleged violation of any provision of this chapter, may consider all of the
following:

(1) The number of violations.

(2) The size and complexity of the controller or processor.

(3) The nature and extent of the controller’s or processor’s processing
activities.

(4) The substantial likelihood of injury to the public.

(5) The safety of persons or property.

(6) Whether such alleged violation was likely caused by human or technical
error.

(7) The extent to which the controller or processor has violated this or
similar laws in the past.

(d) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as providing the basis for, or
be subject to, a private right of action for violations of said sections or
any other law.

(e) A violation of this chapter shall be deemed an unlawful practice under §
2513 of this title and a violation of subchapter II of this title, and shall
be enforced solely by the Department of Justice.

[84 Del. Laws, c. 197, §
1](https://legis.delaware.gov/SessionLaws?volume=84&chapter=197);

  
[84 Del. Laws, c. 197, §
1](https://legis.delaware.gov/SessionLaws?volume=84&chapter=197);

  * [Delaware General Assembly](http://legis.delaware.gov/)
  * [Judicial](http://courts.delaware.gov/)
  * [Executive](http://delaware.gov)
  * [Contact](http://delaware.gov/help/degov-contact.shtml)
  * [Twitter](https://twitter.com/delaware_gov/)
  * [ Help ](../../help/default.html
                  )

