CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

Subject matter

1. The purpose of this Regulation is to improve the functioning of the
internal market and promote the uptake of human-centric and trustworthy
artificial intelligence (AI), while ensuring a high level of protection of
health, safety, fundamental rights enshrined in the Charter, including
democracy, the rule of law and environmental protection, against the harmful
effects of AI systems in the Union and supporting innovation.

2. This Regulation lays down:

(a)   harmonised rules for the placing on the market, the putting into service, and the use of AI systems in the Union;  
  
(b)   prohibitions of certain AI practices;  
  
(c)   specific requirements for high-risk AI systems and obligations for operators of such systems;  
  
(d)   harmonised transparency rules for certain AI systems;  
  
(e)   harmonised rules for the placing on the market of general-purpose AI models;  
  
(f)   rules on market monitoring, market surveillance, governance and enforcement;  
  
(g)   measures to support innovation, with a particular focus on SMEs, including start-ups.  
  
  
Article 2

Scope

1. This Regulation applies to:

(a)   providers placing on the market or putting into service AI systems or placing on the market general-purpose AI models in the Union, irrespective of whether those providers are established or located within the Union or in a third country;  
  
(b)   deployers of AI systems that have their place of establishment or are located within the Union;  
  
(c)   providers and deployers of AI systems that have their place of establishment or are located in a third country, where the output produced by the AI system is used in the Union;  
  
(d)   importers and distributors of AI systems;  
  
(e)   product manufacturers placing on the market or putting into service an AI system together with their product and under their own name or trademark;  
  
(f)   authorised representatives of providers, which are not established in the Union;  
  
(g)   affected persons that are located in the Union.  
  
  
2. For AI systems classified as high-risk AI systems in accordance with
Article 6(1) related to products covered by the Union harmonisation
legislation listed in Section B of Annex I, only Article 6(1), Articles 102 to
109 and Article 112 apply. Article 57 applies only in so far as the
requirements for high-risk AI systems under this Regulation have been
integrated in that Union harmonisation legislation.

3. This Regulation does not apply to areas outside the scope of Union law,
and shall not, in any event, affect the competences of the Member States
concerning national security, regardless of the type of entity entrusted by
the Member States with carrying out tasks in relation to those competences.

This Regulation does not apply to AI systems where and in so far they are
placed on the market, put into service, or used with or without modification
exclusively for military, defence or national security purposes, regardless of
the type of entity carrying out those activities.

This Regulation does not apply to AI systems which are not placed on the
market or put into service in the Union, where the output is used in the Union
exclusively for military, defence or national security purposes, regardless of
the type of entity carrying out those activities.

4. This Regulation applies neither to public authorities in a third country
nor to international organisations falling within the scope of this Regulation
pursuant to paragraph 1, where those authorities or organisations use AI
systems in the framework of international cooperation or agreements for law
enforcement and judicial cooperation with the Union or with one or more Member
States, provided that such a third country or international organisation
provides adequate safeguards with respect to the protection of fundamental
rights and freedoms of individuals.

5. This Regulation shall not affect the application of the provisions on the
liability of providers of intermediary services as set out in Chapter II of
Regulation (EU) 2022/2065.

6. This Regulation does not apply to AI systems or AI models, including their
output, specifically developed and put into service for the sole purpose of
scientific research and development.

7. Union law on the protection of personal data, privacy and the
confidentiality of communications applies to personal data processed in
connection with the rights and obligations laid down in this Regulation. This
Regulation shall not affect Regulation (EU) 2016/679 or (EU) 2018/1725, or
Directive 2002/58/EC or (EU) 2016/680, without prejudice to Article 10(5) and
Article 59 of this Regulation.

8. This Regulation does not apply to any research, testing or development
activity regarding AI systems or AI models prior to their being placed on the
market or put into service. Such activities shall be conducted in accordance
with applicable Union law. Testing in real world conditions shall not be
covered by that exclusion.

9. This Regulation is without prejudice to the rules laid down by other Union
legal acts related to consumer protection and product safety.

10. This Regulation does not apply to obligations of deployers who are
natural persons using AI systems in the course of a purely personal non-
professional activity.

11. This Regulation does not preclude the Union or Member States from
maintaining or introducing laws, regulations or administrative provisions
which are more favourable to workers in terms of protecting their rights in
respect of the use of AI systems by employers, or from encouraging or allowing
the application of collective agreements which are more favourable to workers.

12. This Regulation does not apply to AI systems released under free and
open-source licences, unless they are placed on the market or put into service
as high-risk AI systems or as an AI system that falls under Article 5 or 50.

Article 3

Definitions

For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply:

(1)   ‘AI system’ means a machine-based system that is designed to operate with varying levels of autonomy and that may exhibit adaptiveness after deployment, and that, for explicit or implicit objectives, infers, from the input it receives, how to generate outputs such as predictions, content, recommendations, or decisions that can influence physical or virtual environments;  
  
(2)   ‘risk’ means the combination of the probability of an occurrence of harm and the severity of that harm;  
  
(3)   ‘provider’ means a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body that develops an AI system or a general-purpose AI model or that has an AI system or a general-purpose AI model developed and places it on the market or puts the AI system into service under its own name or trademark, whether for payment or free of charge;  
  
(4)   ‘deployer’ means a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body using an AI system under its authority except where the AI system is used in the course of a personal non-professional activity;  
  
(5)   ‘authorised representative’ means a natural or legal person located or established in the Union who has received and accepted a written mandate from a provider of an AI system or a general-purpose AI model to, respectively, perform and carry out on its behalf the obligations and procedures established by this Regulation;  
  
(6)   ‘importer’ means a natural or legal person located or established in the Union that places on the market an AI system that bears the name or trademark of a natural or legal person established in a third country;  
  
(7)   ‘distributor’ means a natural or legal person in the supply chain, other than the provider or the importer, that makes an AI system available on the Union market;  
  
(8)   ‘operator’ means a provider, product manufacturer, deployer, authorised representative, importer or distributor;  
  
(9)   ‘placing on the market’ means the first making available of an AI system or a general-purpose AI model on the Union market;  
  
(10)   ‘making available on the market’ means the supply of an AI system or a general-purpose AI model for distribution or use on the Union market in the course of a commercial activity, whether in return for payment or free of charge;  
  
(11)   ‘putting into service’ means the supply of an AI system for first use directly to the deployer or for own use in the Union for its intended purpose;  
  
(12)   ‘intended purpose’ means the use for which an AI system is intended by the provider, including the specific context and conditions of use, as specified in the information supplied by the provider in the instructions for use, promotional or sales materials and statements, as well as in the technical documentation;  
  
(13)   ‘reasonably foreseeable misuse’ means the use of an AI system in a way that is not in accordance with its intended purpose, but which may result from reasonably foreseeable human behaviour or interaction with other systems, including other AI systems;  
  
(14)   ‘safety component’ means a component of a product or of an AI system which fulfils a safety function for that product or AI system, or the failure or malfunctioning of which endangers the health and safety of persons or property;  
  
(15)   ‘instructions for use’ means the information provided by the provider to inform the deployer of, in particular, an AI system’s intended purpose and proper use;  
  
(16)   ‘recall of an AI system’ means any measure aiming to achieve the return to the provider or taking out of service or disabling the use of an AI system made available to deployers;  
  
(17)   ‘withdrawal of an AI system’ means any measure aiming to prevent an AI system in the supply chain being made available on the market;  
  
(18)   ‘performance of an AI system’ means the ability of an AI system to achieve its intended purpose;  
  
(19)   ‘notifying authority’ means the national authority responsible for setting up and carrying out the necessary procedures for the assessment, designation and notification of conformity assessment bodies and for their monitoring;  
  
(20)   ‘conformity assessment’ means the process of demonstrating whether the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2 relating to a high-risk AI system have been fulfilled;  
  
(21)   ‘conformity assessment body’ means a body that performs third-party conformity assessment activities, including testing, certification and inspection;  
  
(22)   ‘notified body’ means a conformity assessment body notified in accordance with this Regulation and other relevant Union harmonisation legislation;  
  
(23)   ‘substantial modification’ means a change to an AI system after its placing on the market or putting into service which is not foreseen or planned in the initial conformity assessment carried out by the provider and as a result of which the compliance of the AI system with the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2 is affected or results in a modification to the intended purpose for which the AI system has been assessed;  
  
(24)   ‘CE marking’ means a marking by which a provider indicates that an AI system is in conformity with the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2 and other applicable Union harmonisation legislation providing for its affixing;  
  
(25)   ‘post-market monitoring system’ means all activities carried out by providers of AI systems to collect and review experience gained from the use of AI systems they place on the market or put into service for the purpose of identifying any need to immediately apply any necessary corrective or preventive actions;  
  
(26)   ‘market surveillance authority’ means the national authority carrying out the activities and taking the measures pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2019/1020;  
  
(27)   ‘harmonised standard’ means a harmonised standard as defined in Article 2(1), point (c), of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012;  
  
(28)   ‘common specification’ means a set of technical specifications as defined in Article 2, point (4) of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012, providing means to comply with certain requirements established under this Regulation;  
  
(29)   ‘training data’ means data used for training an AI system through fitting its learnable parameters;  
  
(30)   ‘validation data’ means data used for providing an evaluation of the trained AI system and for tuning its non-learnable parameters and its learning process in order, inter alia, to prevent underfitting or overfitting;  
  
(31)   ‘validation data set’ means a separate data set or part of the training data set, either as a fixed or variable split;  
  
(32)   ‘testing data’ means data used for providing an independent evaluation of the AI system in order to confirm the expected performance of that system before its placing on the market or putting into service;  
  
(33)   ‘input data’ means data provided to or directly acquired by an AI system on the basis of which the system produces an output;  
  
(34)   ‘biometric data’ means personal data resulting from specific technical processing relating to the physical, physiological or behavioural characteristics of a natural person, such as facial images or dactyloscopic data;  
  
(35)   ‘biometric identification’ means the automated recognition of physical, physiological, behavioural, or psychological human features for the purpose of establishing the identity of a natural person by comparing biometric data of that individual to biometric data of individuals stored in a database;  
  
(36)   ‘biometric verification’ means the automated, one-to-one verification, including authentication, of the identity of natural persons by comparing their biometric data to previously provided biometric data;  
  
(37)   ‘special categories of personal data’ means the categories of personal data referred to in Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, Article 10 of Directive (EU) 2016/680 and Article 10(1) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725;  
  
(38)   ‘sensitive operational data’ means operational data related to activities of prevention, detection, investigation or prosecution of criminal offences, the disclosure of which could jeopardise the integrity of criminal proceedings;  
  
(39)   ‘emotion recognition system’ means an AI system for the purpose of identifying or inferring emotions or intentions of natural persons on the basis of their biometric data;  
  
(40)   ‘biometric categorisation system’ means an AI system for the purpose of assigning natural persons to specific categories on the basis of their biometric data, unless it is ancillary to another commercial service and strictly necessary for objective technical reasons;  
  
(41)   ‘remote biometric identification system’ means an AI system for the purpose of identifying natural persons, without their active involvement, typically at a distance through the comparison of a person’s biometric data with the biometric data contained in a reference database;  
  
(42)   ‘real-time remote biometric identification system’ means a remote biometric identification system, whereby the capturing of biometric data, the comparison and the identification all occur without a significant delay, comprising not only instant identification, but also limited short delays in order to avoid circumvention;  
  
(43)   ‘post-remote biometric identification system’ means a remote biometric identification system other than a real-time remote biometric identification system;  
  
(44)   ‘publicly accessible space’ means any publicly or privately owned physical place accessible to an undetermined number of natural persons, regardless of whether certain conditions for access may apply, and regardless of the potential capacity restrictions;  
  
(45)   ‘law enforcement authority’ means:

(a)   any public authority competent for the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security; or  
  
(b)   any other body or entity entrusted by Member State law to exercise public authority and public powers for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security;  
  
(46)   ‘law enforcement’ means activities carried out by law enforcement authorities or on their behalf for the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including safeguarding against and preventing threats to public security;  
  
(47)   ‘AI Office’ means the Commission’s function of contributing to the implementation, monitoring and supervision of AI systems and general-purpose AI models, and AI governance, provided for in Commission Decision of 24 January 2024; references in this Regulation to the AI Office shall be construed as references to the Commission;  
  
(48)   ‘national competent authority’ means a notifying authority or a market surveillance authority; as regards AI systems put into service or used by Union institutions, agencies, offices and bodies, references to national competent authorities or market surveillance authorities in this Regulation shall be construed as references to the European Data Protection Supervisor;  
  
(49)   ‘serious incident’ means an incident or malfunctioning of an AI system that directly or indirectly leads to any of the following:

(a)   the death of a person, or serious harm to a person’s health;  
  
(b)   a serious and irreversible disruption of the management or operation of critical infrastructure;  
  
(c)   the infringement of obligations under Union law intended to protect fundamental rights;  
  
(d)   serious harm to property or the environment;  
  
(50)   ‘personal data’ means personal data as defined in Article 4, point (1), of Regulation (EU) 2016/679;  
  
(51)   ‘non-personal data’ means data other than personal data as defined in Article 4, point (1), of Regulation (EU) 2016/679;  
  
(52)   ‘profiling’ means profiling as defined in Article 4, point (4), of Regulation (EU) 2016/679;  
  
(53)   ‘real-world testing plan’ means a document that describes the objectives, methodology, geographical, population and temporal scope, monitoring, organisation and conduct of testing in real-world conditions;  
  
(54)   ‘sandbox plan’ means a document agreed between the participating provider and the competent authority describing the objectives, conditions, timeframe, methodology and requirements for the activities carried out within the sandbox;  
  
(55)   ‘AI regulatory sandbox’ means a controlled framework set up by a competent authority which offers providers or prospective providers of AI systems the possibility to develop, train, validate and test, where appropriate in real-world conditions, an innovative AI system, pursuant to a sandbox plan for a limited time under regulatory supervision;  
  
(56)   ‘AI literacy’ means skills, knowledge and understanding that allow providers, deployers and affected persons, taking into account their respective rights and obligations in the context of this Regulation, to make an informed deployment of AI systems, as well as to gain awareness about the opportunities and risks of AI and possible harm it can cause;  
  
(57)   ‘testing in real-world conditions’ means the temporary testing of an AI system for its intended purpose in real-world conditions outside a laboratory or otherwise simulated environment, with a view to gathering reliable and robust data and to assessing and verifying the conformity of the AI system with the requirements of this Regulation and it does not qualify as placing the AI system on the market or putting it into service within the meaning of this Regulation, provided that all the conditions laid down in Article 57 or 60 are fulfilled;  
  
(58)   ‘subject’, for the purpose of real-world testing, means a natural person who participates in testing in real-world conditions;  
  
(59)   ‘informed consent’ means a subject’s freely given, specific, unambiguous and voluntary expression of his or her willingness to participate in a particular testing in real-world conditions, after having been informed of all aspects of the testing that are relevant to the subject’s decision to participate;  
  
(60)   ‘deep fake’ means AI-generated or manipulated image, audio or video content that resembles existing persons, objects, places, entities or events and would falsely appear to a person to be authentic or truthful;  
  
(61)   ‘widespread infringement’ means any act or omission contrary to Union law protecting the interest of individuals, which:

(a)  has harmed or is likely to harm the collective interests of individuals residing in at least two Member States other than the Member State in which:
(i)  the act or omission originated or took place;  
  
(ii)   the provider concerned, or, where applicable, its authorised representative is located or established; or  
  
(iii)   the deployer is established, when the infringement is committed by the deployer;  
  
(b)   has caused, causes or is likely to cause harm to the collective interests of individuals and has common features, including the same unlawful practice or the same interest being infringed, and is occurring concurrently, committed by the same operator, in at least three Member States;  
  
(62)   ‘critical infrastructure’ means critical infrastructure as defined in Article 2, point (4), of Directive (EU) 2022/2557;  
  
(63)   ‘general-purpose AI model’ means an AI model, including where such an AI model is trained with a large amount of data using self-supervision at scale, that displays significant generality and is capable of competently performing a wide range of distinct tasks regardless of the way the model is placed on the market and that can be integrated into a variety of downstream systems or applications, except AI models that are used for research, development or prototyping activities before they are placed on the market;  
  
(64)   ‘high-impact capabilities’ means capabilities that match or exceed the capabilities recorded in the most advanced general-purpose AI models;  
  
(65)   ‘systemic risk’ means a risk that is specific to the high-impact capabilities of general-purpose AI models, having a significant impact on the Union market due to their reach, or due to actual or reasonably foreseeable negative effects on public health, safety, public security, fundamental rights, or the society as a whole, that can be propagated at scale across the value chain;  
  
(66)   ‘general-purpose AI system’ means an AI system which is based on a general-purpose AI model and which has the capability to serve a variety of purposes, both for direct use as well as for integration in other AI systems;  
  
(67)   ‘floating-point operation’ means any mathematical operation or assignment involving floating-point numbers, which are a subset of the real numbers typically represented on computers by an integer of fixed precision scaled by an integer exponent of a fixed base;  
  
(68)   ‘downstream provider’ means a provider of an AI system, including a general-purpose AI system, which integrates an AI model, regardless of whether the AI model is provided by themselves and vertically integrated or provided by another entity based on contractual relations.  
  
  
Article 4

AI literacy

Providers and deployers of AI systems shall take measures to ensure, to their
best extent, a sufficient level of AI literacy of their staff and other
persons dealing with the operation and use of AI systems on their behalf,
taking into account their technical knowledge, experience, education and
training and the context the AI systems are to be used in, and considering the
persons or groups of persons on whom the AI systems are to be used.

CHAPTER II

PROHIBITED AI PRACTICES

Article 5

Prohibited AI practices

1. The following AI practices shall be prohibited:

(a)   the placing on the market, the putting into service or the use of an AI system that deploys subliminal techniques beyond a person’s consciousness or purposefully manipulative or deceptive techniques, with the objective, or the effect of materially distorting the behaviour of a person or a group of persons by appreciably impairing their ability to make an informed decision, thereby causing them to take a decision that they would not have otherwise taken in a manner that causes or is reasonably likely to cause that person, another person or group of persons significant harm;  
  
(b)   the placing on the market, the putting into service or the use of an AI system that exploits any of the vulnerabilities of a natural person or a specific group of persons due to their age, disability or a specific social or economic situation, with the objective, or the effect, of materially distorting the behaviour of that person or a person belonging to that group in a manner that causes or is reasonably likely to cause that person or another person significant harm;  
  
(c)   the placing on the market, the putting into service or the use of AI systems for the evaluation or classification of natural persons or groups of persons over a certain period of time based on their social behaviour or known, inferred or predicted personal or personality characteristics, with the social score leading to either or both of the following:

(i)   detrimental or unfavourable treatment of certain natural persons or groups of persons in social contexts that are unrelated to the contexts in which the data was originally generated or collected;  
  
(ii)   detrimental or unfavourable treatment of certain natural persons or groups of persons that is unjustified or disproportionate to their social behaviour or its gravity;  
  
(d)   the placing on the market, the putting into service for this specific purpose, or the use of an AI system for making risk assessments of natural persons in order to assess or predict the risk of a natural person committing a criminal offence, based solely on the profiling of a natural person or on assessing their personality traits and characteristics; this prohibition shall not apply to AI systems used to support the human assessment of the involvement of a person in a criminal activity, which is already based on objective and verifiable facts directly linked to a criminal activity;  
  
(e)   the placing on the market, the putting into service for this specific purpose, or the use of AI systems that create or expand facial recognition databases through the untargeted scraping of facial images from the internet or CCTV footage;  
  
(f)   the placing on the market, the putting into service for this specific purpose, or the use of AI systems to infer emotions of a natural person in the areas of workplace and education institutions, except where the use of the AI system is intended to be put in place or into the market for medical or safety reasons;  
  
(g)   the placing on the market, the putting into service for this specific purpose, or the use of biometric categorisation systems that categorise individually natural persons based on their biometric data to deduce or infer their race, political opinions, trade union membership, religious or philosophical beliefs, sex life or sexual orientation; this prohibition does not cover any labelling or filtering of lawfully acquired biometric datasets, such as images, based on biometric data or categorizing of biometric data in the area of law enforcement;  
  
(h)   the use of ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification systems in publicly accessible spaces for the purposes of law enforcement, unless and in so far as such use is strictly necessary for one of the following objectives:

(i)  the targeted search for specific victims of abduction, trafficking in human beings or sexual exploitation of human beings, as well as the search for missing persons;  
  
(ii)   the prevention of a specific, substantial and imminent threat to the life or physical safety of natural persons or a genuine and present or genuine and foreseeable threat of a terrorist attack;  
  
(iii)   the localisation or identification of a person suspected of having committed a criminal offence, for the purpose of conducting a criminal investigation or prosecution or executing a criminal penalty for offences referred to in Annex II and punishable in the Member State concerned by a custodial sentence or a detention order for a maximum period of at least four years.  
  
  
Point (h) of the first subparagraph is without prejudice to Article 9 of
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 for the processing of biometric data for purposes
other than law enforcement.

2. The use of ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification systems in publicly
accessible spaces for the purposes of law enforcement for any of the
objectives referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (h), shall be
deployed for the purposes set out in that point only to confirm the identity
of the specifically targeted individual, and it shall take into account the
following elements:

(a)   the nature of the situation giving rise to the possible use, in particular the seriousness, probability and scale of the harm that would be caused if the system were not used;  
  
(b)   the consequences of the use of the system for the rights and freedoms of all persons concerned, in particular the seriousness, probability and scale of those consequences.  
  
  
In addition, the use of ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification systems in
publicly accessible spaces for the purposes of law enforcement for any of the
objectives referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (h), of this
Article shall comply with necessary and proportionate safeguards and
conditions in relation to the use in accordance with the national law
authorising the use thereof, in particular as regards the temporal, geographic
and personal limitations. The use of the ‘real-time’ remote biometric
identification system in publicly accessible spaces shall be authorised only
if the law enforcement authority has completed a fundamental rights impact
assessment as provided for in Article 27 and has registered the system in the
EU database according to Article 49. However, in duly justified cases of
urgency, the use of such systems may be commenced without the registration in
the EU database, provided that such registration is completed without undue
delay.

3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (h) and
paragraph 2, each use for the purposes of law enforcement of a ‘real-time’
remote biometric identification system in publicly accessible spaces shall be
subject to a prior authorisation granted by a judicial authority or an
independent administrative authority whose decision is binding of the Member
State in which the use is to take place, issued upon a reasoned request and in
accordance with the detailed rules of national law referred to in paragraph 5.
However, in a duly justified situation of urgency, the use of such system may
be commenced without an authorisation provided that such authorisation is
requested without undue delay, at the latest within 24 hours. If such
authorisation is rejected, the use shall be stopped with immediate effect and
all the data, as well as the results and outputs of that use shall be
immediately discarded and deleted.

The competent judicial authority or an independent administrative authority
whose decision is binding shall grant the authorisation only where it is
satisfied, on the basis of objective evidence or clear indications presented
to it, that the use of the ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification system
concerned is necessary for, and proportionate to, achieving one of the
objectives specified in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (h), as
identified in the request and, in particular, remains limited to what is
strictly necessary concerning the period of time as well as the geographic and
personal scope. In deciding on the request, that authority shall take into
account the elements referred to in paragraph 2. No decision that produces an
adverse legal effect on a person may be taken based solely on the output of
the ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification system.

4. Without prejudice to paragraph 3, each use of a ‘real-time’ remote
biometric identification system in publicly accessible spaces for law
enforcement purposes shall be notified to the relevant market surveillance
authority and the national data protection authority in accordance with the
national rules referred to in paragraph 5. The notification shall, as a
minimum, contain the information specified under paragraph 6 and shall not
include sensitive operational data.

5. A Member State may decide to provide for the possibility to fully or
partially authorise the use of ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification
systems in publicly accessible spaces for the purposes of law enforcement
within the limits and under the conditions listed in paragraph 1, first
subparagraph, point (h), and paragraphs 2 and 3. Member States concerned shall
lay down in their national law the necessary detailed rules for the request,
issuance and exercise of, as well as supervision and reporting relating to,
the authorisations referred to in paragraph 3. Those rules shall also specify
in respect of which of the objectives listed in paragraph 1, first
subparagraph, point (h), including which of the criminal offences referred to
in point (h)(iii) thereof, the competent authorities may be authorised to use
those systems for the purposes of law enforcement. Member States shall notify
those rules to the Commission at the latest 30 days following the adoption
thereof. Member States may introduce, in accordance with Union law, more
restrictive laws on the use of remote biometric identification systems.

6. National market surveillance authorities and the national data protection
authorities of Member States that have been notified of the use of ‘real-time’
remote biometric identification systems in publicly accessible spaces for law
enforcement purposes pursuant to paragraph 4 shall submit to the Commission
annual reports on such use. For that purpose, the Commission shall provide
Member States and national market surveillance and data protection authorities
with a template, including information on the number of the decisions taken by
competent judicial authorities or an independent administrative authority
whose decision is binding upon requests for authorisations in accordance with
paragraph 3 and their result.

7. The Commission shall publish annual reports on the use of real-time remote
biometric identification systems in publicly accessible spaces for law
enforcement purposes, based on aggregated data in Member States on the basis
of the annual reports referred to in paragraph 6. Those annual reports shall
not include sensitive operational data of the related law enforcement
activities.

8. This Article shall not affect the prohibitions that apply where an AI
practice infringes other Union law.

CHAPTER III

HIGH-RISK AI SYSTEMS

SECTION 1

Classification of AI systems as high-risk

Article 6

Classification rules for high-risk AI systems

1. Irrespective of whether an AI system is placed on the market or put into
service independently of the products referred to in points (a) and (b), that
AI system shall be considered to be high-risk where both of the following
conditions are fulfilled:

(a)   the AI system is intended to be used as a safety component of a product, or the AI system is itself a product, covered by the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex I;  
  
(b)   the product whose safety component pursuant to point (a) is the AI system, or the AI system itself as a product, is required to undergo a third-party conformity assessment, with a view to the placing on the market or the putting into service of that product pursuant to the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex I.  
  
  
2. In addition to the high-risk AI systems referred to in paragraph 1, AI
systems referred to in Annex III shall be considered to be high-risk.

3. By derogation from paragraph 2, an AI system referred to in Annex III
shall not be considered to be high-risk where it does not pose a significant
risk of harm to the health, safety or fundamental rights of natural persons,
including by not materially influencing the outcome of decision making.

The first subparagraph shall apply where any of the following conditions is
fulfilled:

(a)   the AI system is intended to perform a narrow procedural task;  
  
(b)   the AI system is intended to improve the result of a previously completed human activity;  
  
(c)   the AI system is intended to detect decision-making patterns or deviations from prior decision-making patterns and is not meant to replace or influence the previously completed human assessment, without proper human review; or  
  
(d)   the AI system is intended to perform a preparatory task to an assessment relevant for the purposes of the use cases listed in Annex III.  
  
  
Notwithstanding the first subparagraph, an AI system referred to in Annex III
shall always be considered to be high-risk where the AI system performs
profiling of natural persons.

4. A provider who considers that an AI system referred to in Annex III is not
high-risk shall document its assessment before that system is placed on the
market or put into service. Such provider shall be subject to the registration
obligation set out in Article 49(2). Upon request of national competent
authorities, the provider shall provide the documentation of the assessment.

5. The Commission shall, after consulting the European Artificial
Intelligence Board (the ‘Board’), and no later than 2 February 2026, provide
guidelines specifying the practical implementation of this Article in line
with Article 96 together with a comprehensive list of practical examples of
use cases of AI systems that are high-risk and not high-risk.

6. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with
Article 97 in order to amend paragraph 3, second subparagraph, of this Article
by adding new conditions to those laid down therein, or by modifying them,
where there is concrete and reliable evidence of the existence of AI systems
that fall under the scope of Annex III, but do not pose a significant risk of
harm to the health, safety or fundamental rights of natural persons.

7. The Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 97 in
order to amend paragraph 3, second subparagraph, of this Article by deleting
any of the conditions laid down therein, where there is concrete and reliable
evidence that this is necessary to maintain the level of protection of health,
safety and fundamental rights provided for by this Regulation.

8. Any amendment to the conditions laid down in paragraph 3, second
subparagraph, adopted in accordance with paragraphs 6 and 7 of this Article
shall not decrease the overall level of protection of health, safety and
fundamental rights provided for by this Regulation and shall ensure
consistency with the delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 7(1), and take
account of market and technological developments.

Article 7

Amendments to Annex III

1. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with
Article 97 to amend Annex III by adding or modifying use-cases of high-risk AI
systems where both of the following conditions are fulfilled:

(a)   the AI systems are intended to be used in any of the areas listed in Annex III;  
  
(b)   the AI systems pose a risk of harm to health and safety, or an adverse impact on fundamental rights, and that risk is equivalent to, or greater than, the risk of harm or of adverse impact posed by the high-risk AI systems already referred to in Annex III.  
  
  
2. When assessing the condition under paragraph 1, point (b), the Commission
shall take into account the following criteria:

(a)   the intended purpose of the AI system;  
  
(b)   the extent to which an AI system has been used or is likely to be used;  
  
(c)   the nature and amount of the data processed and used by the AI system, in particular whether special categories of personal data are processed;  
  
(d)   the extent to which the AI system acts autonomously and the possibility for a human to override a decision or recommendations that may lead to potential harm;  
  
(e)   the extent to which the use of an AI system has already caused harm to health and safety, has had an adverse impact on fundamental rights or has given rise to significant concerns in relation to the likelihood of such harm or adverse impact, as demonstrated, for example, by reports or documented allegations submitted to national competent authorities or by other reports, as appropriate;  
  
(f)   the potential extent of such harm or such adverse impact, in particular in terms of its intensity and its ability to affect multiple persons or to disproportionately affect a particular group of persons;  
  
(g)   the extent to which persons who are potentially harmed or suffer an adverse impact are dependent on the outcome produced with an AI system, in particular because for practical or legal reasons it is not reasonably possible to opt-out from that outcome;  
  
(h)   the extent to which there is an imbalance of power, or the persons who are potentially harmed or suffer an adverse impact are in a vulnerable position in relation to the deployer of an AI system, in particular due to status, authority, knowledge, economic or social circumstances, or age;  
  
(i)   the extent to which the outcome produced involving an AI system is easily corrigible or reversible, taking into account the technical solutions available to correct or reverse it, whereby outcomes having an adverse impact on health, safety or fundamental rights, shall not be considered to be easily corrigible or reversible;  
  
(j)   the magnitude and likelihood of benefit of the deployment of the AI system for individuals, groups, or society at large, including possible improvements in product safety;  
  
(k)   the extent to which existing Union law provides for:

(i)   effective measures of redress in relation to the risks posed by an AI system, with the exclusion of claims for damages;  
  
(ii)   effective measures to prevent or substantially minimise those risks.  
  
  
3. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with
Article 97 to amend the list in Annex III by removing high-risk AI systems
where both of the following conditions are fulfilled:

(a)   the high-risk AI system concerned no longer poses any significant risks to fundamental rights, health or safety, taking into account the criteria listed in paragraph 2;  
  
(b)   the deletion does not decrease the overall level of protection of health, safety and fundamental rights under Union law.  
  
  
SECTION 2

Requirements for high-risk AI systems

Article 8

Compliance with the requirements

1. High-risk AI systems shall comply with the requirements laid down in this
Section, taking into account their intended purpose as well as the generally
acknowledged state of the art on AI and AI-related technologies. The risk
management system referred to in Article 9 shall be taken into account when
ensuring compliance with those requirements.

2. Where a product contains an AI system, to which the requirements of this
Regulation as well as requirements of the Union harmonisation legislation
listed in Section A of Annex I apply, providers shall be responsible for
ensuring that their product is fully compliant with all applicable
requirements under applicable Union harmonisation legislation. In ensuring the
compliance of high-risk AI systems referred to in paragraph 1 with the
requirements set out in this Section, and in order to ensure consistency,
avoid duplication and minimise additional burdens, providers shall have a
choice of integrating, as appropriate, the necessary testing and reporting
processes, information and documentation they provide with regard to their
product into documentation and procedures that already exist and are required
under the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Section A of Annex I.

Article 9

Risk management system

1.  A risk management system shall be established, implemented, documented and
maintained in relation to high-risk AI systems.

2.  The risk management system shall be understood as a continuous iterative
process planned and run throughout the entire lifecycle of a high-risk AI
system, requiring regular systematic review and updating. It shall comprise
the following steps:

(a)   the identification and analysis of the known and the reasonably foreseeable risks that the high-risk AI system can pose to health, safety or fundamental rights when the high-risk AI system is used in accordance with its intended purpose;  
  
(b)   the estimation and evaluation of the risks that may emerge when the high-risk AI system is used in accordance with its intended purpose, and under conditions of reasonably foreseeable misuse;  
  
(c)   the evaluation of other risks possibly arising, based on the analysis of data gathered from the post-market monitoring system referred to in Article 72;  
  
(d)   the adoption of appropriate and targeted risk management measures designed to address the risks identified pursuant to point (a).  
  
  
3.  The risks referred to in this Article shall concern only those which may
be reasonably mitigated or eliminated through the development or design of the
high-risk AI system, or the provision of adequate technical information.

4.  The risk management measures referred to in paragraph 2, point (d), shall
give due consideration to the effects and possible interaction resulting from
the combined application of the requirements set out in this Section, with a
view to minimising risks more effectively while achieving an appropriate
balance in implementing the measures to fulfil those requirements.

5.  The risk management measures referred to in paragraph 2, point (d), shall
be such that the relevant residual risk associated with each hazard, as well
as the overall residual risk of the high-risk AI systems is judged to be
acceptable.

In identifying the most appropriate risk management measures, the following
shall be ensured:

(a)   elimination or reduction of risks identified and evaluated pursuant to paragraph 2 in as far as technically feasible through adequate design and development of the high-risk AI system;  
  
(b)   where appropriate, implementation of adequate mitigation and control measures addressing risks that cannot be eliminated;  
  
(c)   provision of information required pursuant to Article 13 and, where appropriate, training to deployers.  
  
  
With a view to eliminating or reducing risks related to the use of the high-
risk AI system, due consideration shall be given to the technical knowledge,
experience, education, the training to be expected by the deployer, and the
presumable context in which the system is intended to be used.

6.  High-risk AI systems shall be tested for the purpose of identifying the
most appropriate and targeted risk management measures. Testing shall ensure
that high-risk AI systems perform consistently for their intended purpose and
that they are in compliance with the requirements set out in this Section.

7.  Testing procedures may include testing in real-world conditions in
accordance with Article 60.

8.  The testing of high-risk AI systems shall be performed, as appropriate, at
any time throughout the development process, and, in any event, prior to their
being placed on the market or put into service. Testing shall be carried out
against prior defined metrics and probabilistic thresholds that are
appropriate to the intended purpose of the high-risk AI system.

9.  When implementing the risk management system as provided for in paragraphs
1 to 7, providers shall give consideration to whether in view of its intended
purpose the high-risk AI system is likely to have an adverse impact on persons
under the age of 18 and, as appropriate, other vulnerable groups.

10.  For providers of high-risk AI systems that are subject to requirements
regarding internal risk management processes under other relevant provisions
of Union law, the aspects provided in paragraphs 1 to 9 may be part of, or
combined with, the risk management procedures established pursuant to that
law.

Article 10

Data and data governance

1.  High-risk AI systems which make use of techniques involving the training
of AI models with data shall be developed on the basis of training, validation
and testing data sets that meet the quality criteria referred to in paragraphs
2 to 5 whenever such data sets are used.

2.  Training, validation and testing data sets shall be subject to data
governance and management practices appropriate for the intended purpose of
the high-risk AI system. Those practices shall concern in particular:

(a)   the relevant design choices;  
  
(b)   data collection processes and the origin of data, and in the case of personal data, the original purpose of the data collection;  
  
(c)   relevant data-preparation processing operations, such as annotation, labelling, cleaning, updating, enrichment and aggregation;  
  
(d)   the formulation of assumptions, in particular with respect to the information that the data are supposed to measure and represent;  
  
(e)   an assessment of the availability, quantity and suitability of the data sets that are needed;  
  
(f)   examination in view of possible biases that are likely to affect the health and safety of persons, have a negative impact on fundamental rights or lead to discrimination prohibited under Union law, especially where data outputs influence inputs for future operations;  
  
(g)   appropriate measures to detect, prevent and mitigate possible biases identified according to point (f);  
  
(h)   the identification of relevant data gaps or shortcomings that prevent compliance with this Regulation, and how those gaps and shortcomings can be addressed.  
  
  
3.  Training, validation and testing data sets shall be relevant, sufficiently
representative, and to the best extent possible, free of errors and complete
in view of the intended purpose. They shall have the appropriate statistical
properties, including, where applicable, as regards the persons or groups of
persons in relation to whom the high-risk AI system is intended to be used.
Those characteristics of the data sets may be met at the level of individual
data sets or at the level of a combination thereof.

4.  Data sets shall take into account, to the extent required by the intended
purpose, the characteristics or elements that are particular to the specific
geographical, contextual, behavioural or functional setting within which the
high-risk AI system is intended to be used.

5.  To the extent that it is strictly necessary for the purpose of ensuring
bias detection and correction in relation to the high-risk AI systems in
accordance with paragraph (2), points (f) and (g) of this Article, the
providers of such systems may exceptionally process special categories of
personal data, subject to appropriate safeguards for the fundamental rights
and freedoms of natural persons. In addition to the provisions set out in
Regulations (EU) 2016/679 and (EU) 2018/1725 and Directive (EU) 2016/680, all
the following conditions must be met in order for such processing to occur:

(a)   the bias detection and correction cannot be effectively fulfilled by processing other data, including synthetic or anonymised data;  
  
(b)   the special categories of personal data are subject to technical limitations on the re-use of the personal data, and state-of-the-art security and privacy-preserving measures, including pseudonymisation;  
  
(c)   the special categories of personal data are subject to measures to ensure that the personal data processed are secured, protected, subject to suitable safeguards, including strict controls and documentation of the access, to avoid misuse and ensure that only authorised persons have access to those personal data with appropriate confidentiality obligations;  
  
(d)   the special categories of personal data are not to be transmitted, transferred or otherwise accessed by other parties;  
  
(e)   the special categories of personal data are deleted once the bias has been corrected or the personal data has reached the end of its retention period, whichever comes first;  
  
(f)   the records of processing activities pursuant to Regulations (EU) 2016/679 and (EU) 2018/1725 and Directive (EU) 2016/680 include the reasons why the processing of special categories of personal data was strictly necessary to detect and correct biases, and why that objective could not be achieved by processing other data.  
  
  
6.  For the development of high-risk AI systems not using techniques involving
the training of AI models, paragraphs 2 to 5 apply only to the testing data
sets.

Article 11

Technical documentation

1.  The technical documentation of a high-risk AI system shall be drawn up
before that system is placed on the market or put into service and shall be
kept up-to date.

The technical documentation shall be drawn up in such a way as to demonstrate
that the high-risk AI system complies with the requirements set out in this
Section and to provide national competent authorities and notified bodies with
the necessary information in a clear and comprehensive form to assess the
compliance of the AI system with those requirements. It shall contain, at a
minimum, the elements set out in Annex IV. SMEs, including start-ups, may
provide the elements of the technical documentation specified in Annex IV in a
simplified manner. To that end, the Commission shall establish a simplified
technical documentation form targeted at the needs of small and
microenterprises. Where an SME, including a start-up, opts to provide the
information required in Annex IV in a simplified manner, it shall use the form
referred to in this paragraph. Notified bodies shall accept the form for the
purposes of the conformity assessment.

2.  Where a high-risk AI system related to a product covered by the Union
harmonisation legislation listed in Section A of Annex I is placed on the
market or put into service, a single set of technical documentation shall be
drawn up containing all the information set out in paragraph 1, as well as the
information required under those legal acts.

3.  The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with
Article 97 in order to amend Annex IV, where necessary, to ensure that, in
light of technical progress, the technical documentation provides all the
information necessary to assess the compliance of the system with the
requirements set out in this Section.

Article 12

Record-keeping

1.  High-risk AI systems shall technically allow for the automatic recording
of events (logs) over the lifetime of the system.

2.  In order to ensure a level of traceability of the functioning of a high-
risk AI system that is appropriate to the intended purpose of the system,
logging capabilities shall enable the recording of events relevant for:

(a)   identifying situations that may result in the high-risk AI system presenting a risk within the meaning of Article 79(1) or in a substantial modification;  
  
(b)   facilitating the post-market monitoring referred to in Article 72; and  
  
(c)   monitoring the operation of high-risk AI systems referred to in Article 26(5).  
  
  
3.  For high-risk AI systems referred to in point 1 (a), of Annex III, the
logging capabilities shall provide, at a minimum:

(a)   recording of the period of each use of the system (start date and time and end date and time of each use);  
  
(b)   the reference database against which input data has been checked by the system;  
  
(c)   the input data for which the search has led to a match;  
  
(d)   the identification of the natural persons involved in the verification of the results, as referred to in Article 14(5).  
  
  
Article 13

Transparency and provision of information to deployers

1.  High-risk AI systems shall be designed and developed in such a way as to
ensure that their operation is sufficiently transparent to enable deployers to
interpret a system’s output and use it appropriately. An appropriate type and
degree of transparency shall be ensured with a view to achieving compliance
with the relevant obligations of the provider and deployer set out in Section
3.

2.  High-risk AI systems shall be accompanied by instructions for use in an
appropriate digital format or otherwise that include concise, complete,
correct and clear information that is relevant, accessible and comprehensible
to deployers.

3.  The instructions for use shall contain at least the following information:

(a)   the identity and the contact details of the provider and, where applicable, of its authorised representative;  
  
(b)   the characteristics, capabilities and limitations of performance of the high-risk AI system, including:

(i)   its intended purpose;  
  
(ii)   the level of accuracy, including its metrics, robustness and cybersecurity referred to in Article 15 against which the high-risk AI system has been tested and validated and which can be expected, and any known and foreseeable circumstances that may have an impact on that expected level of accuracy, robustness and cybersecurity;  
  
(iii)   any known or foreseeable circumstance, related to the use of the high-risk AI system in accordance with its intended purpose or under conditions of reasonably foreseeable misuse, which may lead to risks to the health and safety or fundamental rights referred to in Article 9(2);  
  
(iv)   where applicable, the technical capabilities and characteristics of the high-risk AI system to provide information that is relevant to explain its output;  
  
(v)   when appropriate, its performance regarding specific persons or groups of persons on which the system is intended to be used;  
  
(vi)   when appropriate, specifications for the input data, or any other relevant information in terms of the training, validation and testing data sets used, taking into account the intended purpose of the high-risk AI system;  
  
(vii)   where applicable, information to enable deployers to interpret the output of the high-risk AI system and use it appropriately;  
  
(c)   the changes to the high-risk AI system and its performance which have been pre-determined by the provider at the moment of the initial conformity assessment, if any;  
  
(d)   the human oversight measures referred to in Article 14, including the technical measures put in place to facilitate the interpretation of the outputs of the high-risk AI systems by the deployers;  
  
(e)   the computational and hardware resources needed, the expected lifetime of the high-risk AI system and any necessary maintenance and care measures, including their frequency, to ensure the proper functioning of that AI system, including as regards software updates;  
  
(f)   where relevant, a description of the mechanisms included within the high-risk AI system that allows deployers to properly collect, store and interpret the logs in accordance with Article 12.  
  
  
Article 14

Human oversight

1.  High-risk AI systems shall be designed and developed in such a way,
including with appropriate human-machine interface tools, that they can be
effectively overseen by natural persons during the period in which they are in
use.

2.  Human oversight shall aim to prevent or minimise the risks to health,
safety or fundamental rights that may emerge when a high-risk AI system is
used in accordance with its intended purpose or under conditions of reasonably
foreseeable misuse, in particular where such risks persist despite the
application of other requirements set out in this Section.

3.  The oversight measures shall be commensurate with the risks, level of
autonomy and context of use of the high-risk AI system, and shall be ensured
through either one or both of the following types of measures:

(a)   measures identified and built, when technically feasible, into the high-risk AI system by the provider before it is placed on the market or put into service;  
  
(b)   measures identified by the provider before placing the high-risk AI system on the market or putting it into service and that are appropriate to be implemented by the deployer.  
  
  
4.  For the purpose of implementing paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, the high-risk AI
system shall be provided to the deployer in such a way that natural persons to
whom human oversight is assigned are enabled, as appropriate and
proportionate:

(a)   to properly understand the relevant capacities and limitations of the high-risk AI system and be able to duly monitor its operation, including in view of detecting and addressing anomalies, dysfunctions and unexpected performance;  
  
(b)   to remain aware of the possible tendency of automatically relying or over-relying on the output produced by a high-risk AI system (automation bias), in particular for high-risk AI systems used to provide information or recommendations for decisions to be taken by natural persons;  
  
(c)   to correctly interpret the high-risk AI system’s output, taking into account, for example, the interpretation tools and methods available;  
  
(d)   to decide, in any particular situation, not to use the high-risk AI system or to otherwise disregard, override or reverse the output of the high-risk AI system;  
  
(e)   to intervene in the operation of the high-risk AI system or interrupt the system through a ‘stop’ button or a similar procedure that allows the system to come to a halt in a safe state.  
  
  
5.  For high-risk AI systems referred to in point 1(a) of Annex III, the
measures referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article shall be such as to ensure
that, in addition, no action or decision is taken by the deployer on the basis
of the identification resulting from the system unless that identification has
been separately verified and confirmed by at least two natural persons with
the necessary competence, training and authority.

The requirement for a separate verification by at least two natural persons
shall not apply to high-risk AI systems used for the purposes of law
enforcement, migration, border control or asylum, where Union or national law
considers the application of this requirement to be disproportionate.

Article 15

Accuracy, robustness and cybersecurity

1.  High-risk AI systems shall be designed and developed in such a way that
they achieve an appropriate level of accuracy, robustness, and cybersecurity,
and that they perform consistently in those respects throughout their
lifecycle.

2.  To address the technical aspects of how to measure the appropriate levels
of accuracy and robustness set out in paragraph 1 and any other relevant
performance metrics, the Commission shall, in cooperation with relevant
stakeholders and organisations such as metrology and benchmarking authorities,
encourage, as appropriate, the development of benchmarks and measurement
methodologies.

3.  The levels of accuracy and the relevant accuracy metrics of high-risk AI
systems shall be declared in the accompanying instructions of use.

4.  High-risk AI systems shall be as resilient as possible regarding errors,
faults or inconsistencies that may occur within the system or the environment
in which the system operates, in particular due to their interaction with
natural persons or other systems. Technical and organisational measures shall
be taken in this regard.

The robustness of high-risk AI systems may be achieved through technical
redundancy solutions, which may include backup or fail-safe plans.

High-risk AI systems that continue to learn after being placed on the market
or put into service shall be developed in such a way as to eliminate or reduce
as far as possible the risk of possibly biased outputs influencing input for
future operations (feedback loops), and as to ensure that any such feedback
loops are duly addressed with appropriate mitigation measures.

5.  High-risk AI systems shall be resilient against attempts by unauthorised
third parties to alter their use, outputs or performance by exploiting system
vulnerabilities.

The technical solutions aiming to ensure the cybersecurity of high-risk AI
systems shall be appropriate to the relevant circumstances and the risks.

The technical solutions to address AI specific vulnerabilities shall include,
where appropriate, measures to prevent, detect, respond to, resolve and
control for attacks trying to manipulate the training data set (data
poisoning), or pre-trained components used in training (model poisoning),
inputs designed to cause the AI model to make a mistake (adversarial examples
or model evasion), confidentiality attacks or model flaws.

SECTION 3

Obligations of providers and deployers of high-risk AI systems and other
parties

Article 16

Obligations of providers of high-risk AI systems

Providers of high-risk AI systems shall:

(a)   ensure that their high-risk AI systems are compliant with the requirements set out in Section 2;  
  
(b)   indicate on the high-risk AI system or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or its accompanying documentation, as applicable, their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark, the address at which they can be contacted;  
  
(c)   have a quality management system in place which complies with Article 17;  
  
(d)   keep the documentation referred to in Article 18;  
  
(e)   when under their control, keep the logs automatically generated by their high-risk AI systems as referred to in Article 19;  
  
(f)   ensure that the high-risk AI system undergoes the relevant conformity assessment procedure as referred to in Article 43, prior to its being placed on the market or put into service;  
  
(g)   draw up an EU declaration of conformity in accordance with Article 47;  
  
(h)   affix the CE marking to the high-risk AI system or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or its accompanying documentation, to indicate conformity with this Regulation, in accordance with Article 48;  
  
(i)   comply with the registration obligations referred to in Article 49(1);  
  
(j)   take the necessary corrective actions and provide information as required in Article 20;  
  
(k)   upon a reasoned request of a national competent authority, demonstrate the conformity of the high-risk AI system with the requirements set out in Section 2;  
  
(l)   ensure that the high-risk AI system complies with accessibility requirements in accordance with Directives (EU) 2016/2102 and (EU) 2019/882.  
  
  
Article 17

Quality management system

1.  Providers of high-risk AI systems shall put a quality management system in
place that ensures compliance with this Regulation. That system shall be
documented in a systematic and orderly manner in the form of written policies,
procedures and instructions, and shall include at least the following aspects:

(a)   a strategy for regulatory compliance, including compliance with conformity assessment procedures and procedures for the management of modifications to the high-risk AI system;  
  
(b)   techniques, procedures and systematic actions to be used for the design, design control and design verification of the high-risk AI system;  
  
(c)   techniques, procedures and systematic actions to be used for the development, quality control and quality assurance of the high-risk AI system;  
  
(d)   examination, test and validation procedures to be carried out before, during and after the development of the high-risk AI system, and the frequency with which they have to be carried out;  
  
(e)   technical specifications, including standards, to be applied and, where the relevant harmonised standards are not applied in full or do not cover all of the relevant requirements set out in Section 2, the means to be used to ensure that the high-risk AI system complies with those requirements;  
  
(f)   systems and procedures for data management, including data acquisition, data collection, data analysis, data labelling, data storage, data filtration, data mining, data aggregation, data retention and any other operation regarding the data that is performed before and for the purpose of the placing on the market or the putting into service of high-risk AI systems;  
  
(g)   the risk management system referred to in Article 9;  
  
(h)   the setting-up, implementation and maintenance of a post-market monitoring system, in accordance with Article 72;  
  
(i)   procedures related to the reporting of a serious incident in accordance with Article 73;  
  
(j)   the handling of communication with national competent authorities, other relevant authorities, including those providing or supporting the access to data, notified bodies, other operators, customers or other interested parties;  
  
(k)   systems and procedures for record-keeping of all relevant documentation and information;  
  
(l)   resource management, including security-of-supply related measures;  
  
(m)   an accountability framework setting out the responsibilities of the management and other staff with regard to all the aspects listed in this paragraph.  
  
  
2.  The implementation of the aspects referred to in paragraph 1 shall be
proportionate to the size of the provider’s organisation. Providers shall, in
any event, respect the degree of rigour and the level of protection required
to ensure the compliance of their high-risk AI systems with this Regulation.

3.  Providers of high-risk AI systems that are subject to obligations
regarding quality management systems or an equivalent function under relevant
sectoral Union law may include the aspects listed in paragraph 1 as part of
the quality management systems pursuant to that law.

4.  For providers that are financial institutions subject to requirements
regarding their internal governance, arrangements or processes under Union
financial services law, the obligation to put in place a quality management
system, with the exception of paragraph 1, points (g), (h) and (i) of this
Article, shall be deemed to be fulfilled by complying with the rules on
internal governance arrangements or processes pursuant to the relevant Union
financial services law. To that end, any harmonised standards referred to in
Article 40 shall be taken into account.

Article 18

Documentation keeping

1.  The provider shall, for a period ending 10 years after the high-risk AI
system has been placed on the market or put into service, keep at the disposal
of the national competent authorities:

(a)   the technical documentation referred to in Article 11;  
  
(b)   the documentation concerning the quality management system referred to in Article 17;  
  
(c)   the documentation concerning the changes approved by notified bodies, where applicable;  
  
(d)   the decisions and other documents issued by the notified bodies, where applicable;  
  
(e)   the EU declaration of conformity referred to in Article 47.  
  
  
2.  Each Member State shall determine conditions under which the documentation
referred to in paragraph 1 remains at the disposal of the national competent
authorities for the period indicated in that paragraph for the cases when a
provider or its authorised representative established on its territory goes
bankrupt or ceases its activity prior to the end of that period.

3.  Providers that are financial institutions subject to requirements
regarding their internal governance, arrangements or processes under Union
financial services law shall maintain the technical documentation as part of
the documentation kept under the relevant Union financial services law.

Article 19

Automatically generated logs

1.  Providers of high-risk AI systems shall keep the logs referred to in
Article 12(1), automatically generated by their high-risk AI systems, to the
extent such logs are under their control. Without prejudice to applicable
Union or national law, the logs shall be kept for a period appropriate to the
intended purpose of the high-risk AI system, of at least six months, unless
provided otherwise in the applicable Union or national law, in particular in
Union law on the protection of personal data.

2.  Providers that are financial institutions subject to requirements
regarding their internal governance, arrangements or processes under Union
financial services law shall maintain the logs automatically generated by
their high-risk AI systems as part of the documentation kept under the
relevant financial services law.

Article 20

Corrective actions and duty of information

1.  Providers of high-risk AI systems which consider or have reason to
consider that a high-risk AI system that they have placed on the market or put
into service is not in conformity with this Regulation shall immediately take
the necessary corrective actions to bring that system into conformity, to
withdraw it, to disable it, or to recall it, as appropriate. They shall inform
the distributors of the high-risk AI system concerned and, where applicable,
the deployers, the authorised representative and importers accordingly.

2.  Where the high-risk AI system presents a risk within the meaning of
Article 79(1) and the provider becomes aware of that risk, it shall
immediately investigate the causes, in collaboration with the reporting
deployer, where applicable, and inform the market surveillance authorities
competent for the high-risk AI system concerned and, where applicable, the
notified body that issued a certificate for that high-risk AI system in
accordance with Article 44, in particular, of the nature of the non-compliance
and of any relevant corrective action taken.

Article 21

Cooperation with competent authorities

1.  Providers of high-risk AI systems shall, upon a reasoned request by a
competent authority, provide that authority all the information and
documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the high-risk AI
system with the requirements set out in Section 2, in a language which can be
easily understood by the authority in one of the official languages of the
institutions of the Union as indicated by the Member State concerned.

2.  Upon a reasoned request by a competent authority, providers shall also
give the requesting competent authority, as applicable, access to the
automatically generated logs of the high-risk AI system referred to in Article
12(1), to the extent such logs are under their control.

3.  Any information obtained by a competent authority pursuant to this Article
shall be treated in accordance with the confidentiality obligations set out in
Article 78.

Article 22

Authorised representatives of providers of high-risk AI systems

1.  Prior to making their high-risk AI systems available on the Union market,
providers established in third countries shall, by written mandate, appoint an
authorised representative which is established in the Union.

2.  The provider shall enable its authorised representative to perform the
tasks specified in the mandate received from the provider.

3.  The authorised representative shall perform the tasks specified in the
mandate received from the provider. It shall provide a copy of the mandate to
the market surveillance authorities upon request, in one of the official
languages of the institutions of the Union, as indicated by the competent
authority. For the purposes of this Regulation, the mandate shall empower the
authorised representative to carry out the following tasks:

(a)   verify that the EU declaration of conformity referred to in Article 47 and the technical documentation referred to in Article 11 have been drawn up and that an appropriate conformity assessment procedure has been carried out by the provider;  
  
(b)   keep at the disposal of the competent authorities and national authorities or bodies referred to in Article 74(10), for a period of 10 years after the high-risk AI system has been placed on the market or put into service, the contact details of the provider that appointed the authorised representative, a copy of the EU declaration of conformity referred to in Article 47, the technical documentation and, if applicable, the certificate issued by the notified body;  
  
(c)   provide a competent authority, upon a reasoned request, with all the information and documentation, including that referred to in point (b) of this subparagraph, necessary to demonstrate the conformity of a high-risk AI system with the requirements set out in Section 2, including access to the logs, as referred to in Article 12(1), automatically generated by the high-risk AI system, to the extent such logs are under the control of the provider;  
  
(d)   cooperate with competent authorities, upon a reasoned request, in any action the latter take in relation to the high-risk AI system, in particular to reduce and mitigate the risks posed by the high-risk AI system;  
  
(e)   where applicable, comply with the registration obligations referred to in Article 49(1), or, if the registration is carried out by the provider itself, ensure that the information referred to in point 3 of Section A of Annex VIII is correct.  
  
  
The mandate shall empower the authorised representative to be addressed, in
addition to or instead of the provider, by the competent authorities, on all
issues related to ensuring compliance with this Regulation.

4.  The authorised representative shall terminate the mandate if it considers
or has reason to consider the provider to be acting contrary to its
obligations pursuant to this Regulation. In such a case, it shall immediately
inform the relevant market surveillance authority, as well as, where
applicable, the relevant notified body, about the termination of the mandate
and the reasons therefor.

Article 23

Obligations of importers

1.  Before placing a high-risk AI system on the market, importers shall ensure
that the system is in conformity with this Regulation by verifying that:

(a)   the relevant conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 43 has been carried out by the provider of the high-risk AI system;  
  
(b)   the provider has drawn up the technical documentation in accordance with Article 11 and Annex IV;  
  
(c)   the system bears the required CE marking and is accompanied by the EU declaration of conformity referred to in Article 47 and instructions for use;  
  
(d)   the provider has appointed an authorised representative in accordance with Article 22(1).  
  
  
2.  Where an importer has sufficient reason to consider that a high-risk AI
system is not in conformity with this Regulation, or is falsified, or
accompanied by falsified documentation, it shall not place the system on the
market until it has been brought into conformity. Where the high-risk AI
system presents a risk within the meaning of Article 79(1), the importer shall
inform the provider of the system, the authorised representative and the
market surveillance authorities to that effect.

3.  Importers shall indicate their name, registered trade name or registered
trade mark, and the address at which they can be contacted on the high-risk AI
system and on its packaging or its accompanying documentation, where
applicable.

4.  Importers shall ensure that, while a high-risk AI system is under their
responsibility, storage or transport conditions, where applicable, do not
jeopardise its compliance with the requirements set out in Section 2.

5.  Importers shall keep, for a period of 10 years after the high-risk AI
system has been placed on the market or put into service, a copy of the
certificate issued by the notified body, where applicable, of the instructions
for use, and of the EU declaration of conformity referred to in Article 47.

6.  Importers shall provide the relevant competent authorities, upon a
reasoned request, with all the necessary information and documentation,
including that referred to in paragraph 5, to demonstrate the conformity of a
high-risk AI system with the requirements set out in Section 2 in a language
which can be easily understood by them. For this purpose, they shall also
ensure that the technical documentation can be made available to those
authorities.

7.  Importers shall cooperate with the relevant competent authorities in any
action those authorities take in relation to a high-risk AI system placed on
the market by the importers, in particular to reduce and mitigate the risks
posed by it.

Article 24

Obligations of distributors

1.  Before making a high-risk AI system available on the market, distributors
shall verify that it bears the required CE marking, that it is accompanied by
a copy of the EU declaration of conformity referred to in Article 47 and
instructions for use, and that the provider and the importer of that system,
as applicable, have complied with their respective obligations as laid down in
Article 16, points (b) and (c) and Article 23(3).

2.  Where a distributor considers or has reason to consider, on the basis of
the information in its possession, that a high-risk AI system is not in
conformity with the requirements set out in Section 2, it shall not make the
high-risk AI system available on the market until the system has been brought
into conformity with those requirements. Furthermore, where the high-risk AI
system presents a risk within the meaning of Article 79(1), the distributor
shall inform the provider or the importer of the system, as applicable, to
that effect.

3.  Distributors shall ensure that, while a high-risk AI system is under their
responsibility, storage or transport conditions, where applicable, do not
jeopardise the compliance of the system with the requirements set out in
Section 2.

4.  A distributor that considers or has reason to consider, on the basis of
the information in its possession, a high-risk AI system which it has made
available on the market not to be in conformity with the requirements set out
in Section 2, shall take the corrective actions necessary to bring that system
into conformity with those requirements, to withdraw it or recall it, or shall
ensure that the provider, the importer or any relevant operator, as
appropriate, takes those corrective actions. Where the high-risk AI system
presents a risk within the meaning of Article 79(1), the distributor shall
immediately inform the provider or importer of the system and the authorities
competent for the high-risk AI system concerned, giving details, in
particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective actions taken.

5.  Upon a reasoned request from a relevant competent authority, distributors
of a high-risk AI system shall provide that authority with all the information
and documentation regarding their actions pursuant to paragraphs 1 to 4
necessary to demonstrate the conformity of that system with the requirements
set out in Section 2.

6.  Distributors shall cooperate with the relevant competent authorities in
any action those authorities take in relation to a high-risk AI system made
available on the market by the distributors, in particular to reduce or
mitigate the risk posed by it.

Article 25

Responsibilities along the AI value chain

1.  Any distributor, importer, deployer or other third-party shall be
considered to be a provider of a high-risk AI system for the purposes of this
Regulation and shall be subject to the obligations of the provider under
Article 16, in any of the following circumstances:

(a)   they put their name or trademark on a high-risk AI system already placed on the market or put into service, without prejudice to contractual arrangements stipulating that the obligations are otherwise allocated;  
  
(b)   they make a substantial modification to a high-risk AI system that has already been placed on the market or has already been put into service in such a way that it remains a high-risk AI system pursuant to Article 6;  
  
(c)   they modify the intended purpose of an AI system, including a general-purpose AI system, which has not been classified as high-risk and has already been placed on the market or put into service in such a way that the AI system concerned becomes a high-risk AI system in accordance with Article 6.  
  
  
2.  Where the circumstances referred to in paragraph 1 occur, the provider
that initially placed the AI system on the market or put it into service shall
no longer be considered to be a provider of that specific AI system for the
purposes of this Regulation. That initial provider shall closely cooperate
with new providers and shall make available the necessary information and
provide the reasonably expected technical access and other assistance that are
required for the fulfilment of the obligations set out in this Regulation, in
particular regarding the compliance with the conformity assessment of high-
risk AI systems. This paragraph shall not apply in cases where the initial
provider has clearly specified that its AI system is not to be changed into a
high-risk AI system and therefore does not fall under the obligation to hand
over the documentation.

3.  In the case of high-risk AI systems that are safety components of products
covered by the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Section A of Annex I,
the product manufacturer shall be considered to be the provider of the high-
risk AI system, and shall be subject to the obligations under Article 16 under
either of the following circumstances:

(a)   the high-risk AI system is placed on the market together with the product under the name or trademark of the product manufacturer;  
  
(b)   the high-risk AI system is put into service under the name or trademark of the product manufacturer after the product has been placed on the market.  
  
  
4.  The provider of a high-risk AI system and the third party that supplies an
AI system, tools, services, components, or processes that are used or
integrated in a high-risk AI system shall, by written agreement, specify the
necessary information, capabilities, technical access and other assistance
based on the generally acknowledged state of the art, in order to enable the
provider of the high-risk AI system to fully comply with the obligations set
out in this Regulation. This paragraph shall not apply to third parties making
accessible to the public tools, services, processes, or components, other than
general-purpose AI models, under a free and open-source licence.

The AI Office may develop and recommend voluntary model terms for contracts
between providers of high-risk AI systems and third parties that supply tools,
services, components or processes that are used for or integrated into high-
risk AI systems. When developing those voluntary model terms, the AI Office
shall take into account possible contractual requirements applicable in
specific sectors or business cases. The voluntary model terms shall be
published and be available free of charge in an easily usable electronic
format.

5.  Paragraphs 2 and 3 are without prejudice to the need to observe and
protect intellectual property rights, confidential business information and
trade secrets in accordance with Union and national law.

Article 26

Obligations of deployers of high-risk AI systems

1.  Deployers of high-risk AI systems shall take appropriate technical and
organisational measures to ensure they use such systems in accordance with the
instructions for use accompanying the systems, pursuant to paragraphs 3 and 6.

2.  Deployers shall assign human oversight to natural persons who have the
necessary competence, training and authority, as well as the necessary
support.

3.  The obligations set out in paragraphs 1 and 2, are without prejudice to
other deployer obligations under Union or national law and to the deployer’s
freedom to organise its own resources and activities for the purpose of
implementing the human oversight measures indicated by the provider.

4.  Without prejudice to paragraphs 1 and 2, to the extent the deployer
exercises control over the input data, that deployer shall ensure that input
data is relevant and sufficiently representative in view of the intended
purpose of the high-risk AI system.

5.  Deployers shall monitor the operation of the high-risk AI system on the
basis of the instructions for use and, where relevant, inform providers in
accordance with Article 72. Where deployers have reason to consider that the
use of the high-risk AI system in accordance with the instructions may result
in that AI system presenting a risk within the meaning of Article 79(1), they
shall, without undue delay, inform the provider or distributor and the
relevant market surveillance authority, and shall suspend the use of that
system. Where deployers have identified a serious incident, they shall also
immediately inform first the provider, and then the importer or distributor
and the relevant market surveillance authorities of that incident. If the
deployer is not able to reach the provider, Article 73 shall apply mutatis
mutandis. This obligation shall not cover sensitive operational data of
deployers of AI systems which are law enforcement authorities.

For deployers that are financial institutions subject to requirements
regarding their internal governance, arrangements or processes under Union
financial services law, the monitoring obligation set out in the first
subparagraph shall be deemed to be fulfilled by complying with the rules on
internal governance arrangements, processes and mechanisms pursuant to the
relevant financial service law.

6.  Deployers of high-risk AI systems shall keep the logs automatically
generated by that high-risk AI system to the extent such logs are under their
control, for a period appropriate to the intended purpose of the high-risk AI
system, of at least six months, unless provided otherwise in applicable Union
or national law, in particular in Union law on the protection of personal
data.

Deployers that are financial institutions subject to requirements regarding
their internal governance, arrangements or processes under Union financial
services law shall maintain the logs as part of the documentation kept
pursuant to the relevant Union financial service law.

7.  Before putting into service or using a high-risk AI system at the
workplace, deployers who are employers shall inform workers’ representatives
and the affected workers that they will be subject to the use of the high-risk
AI system. This information shall be provided, where applicable, in accordance
with the rules and procedures laid down in Union and national law and practice
on information of workers and their representatives.

8.  Deployers of high-risk AI systems that are public authorities, or Union
institutions, bodies, offices or agencies shall comply with the registration
obligations referred to in Article 49. When such deployers find that the high-
risk AI system that they envisage using has not been registered in the EU
database referred to in Article 71, they shall not use that system and shall
inform the provider or the distributor.

9.  Where applicable, deployers of high-risk AI systems shall use the
information provided under Article 13 of this Regulation to comply with their
obligation to carry out a data protection impact assessment under Article 35
of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 or Article 27 of Directive (EU) 2016/680.

10.  Without prejudice to Directive (EU) 2016/680, in the framework of an
investigation for the targeted search of a person suspected or convicted of
having committed a criminal offence, the deployer of a high-risk AI system for
post-remote biometric identification shall request an authorisation, ex ante,
or without undue delay and no later than 48 hours, by a judicial authority or
an administrative authority whose decision is binding and subject to judicial
review, for the use of that system, except when it is used for the initial
identification of a potential suspect based on objective and verifiable facts
directly linked to the offence. Each use shall be limited to what is strictly
necessary for the investigation of a specific criminal offence.

If the authorisation requested pursuant to the first subparagraph is rejected,
the use of the post-remote biometric identification system linked to that
requested authorisation shall be stopped with immediate effect and the
personal data linked to the use of the high-risk AI system for which the
authorisation was requested shall be deleted.

In no case shall such high-risk AI system for post-remote biometric
identification be used for law enforcement purposes in an untargeted way,
without any link to a criminal offence, a criminal proceeding, a genuine and
present or genuine and foreseeable threat of a criminal offence, or the search
for a specific missing person. It shall be ensured that no decision that
produces an adverse legal effect on a person may be taken by the law
enforcement authorities based solely on the output of such post-remote
biometric identification systems.

This paragraph is without prejudice to Article 9 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679
and Article 10 of Directive (EU) 2016/680 for the processing of biometric
data.

Regardless of the purpose or deployer, each use of such high-risk AI systems
shall be documented in the relevant police file and shall be made available to
the relevant market surveillance authority and the national data protection
authority upon request, excluding the disclosure of sensitive operational data
related to law enforcement. This subparagraph shall be without prejudice to
the powers conferred by Directive (EU) 2016/680 on supervisory authorities.

Deployers shall submit annual reports to the relevant market surveillance and
national data protection authorities on their use of post-remote biometric
identification systems, excluding the disclosure of sensitive operational data
related to law enforcement. The reports may be aggregated to cover more than
one deployment.

Member States may introduce, in accordance with Union law, more restrictive
laws on the use of post-remote biometric identification systems.

11.  Without prejudice to Article 50 of this Regulation, deployers of high-
risk AI systems referred to in Annex III that make decisions or assist in
making decisions related to natural persons shall inform the natural persons
that they are subject to the use of the high-risk AI system. For high-risk AI
systems used for law enforcement purposes Article 13 of Directive (EU)
2016/680 shall apply.

12.  Deployers shall cooperate with the relevant competent authorities in any
action those authorities take in relation to the high-risk AI system in order
to implement this Regulation.

Article 27

Fundamental rights impact assessment for high-risk AI systems

1.  Prior to deploying a high-risk AI system referred to in Article 6(2), with
the exception of high-risk AI systems intended to be used in the area listed
in point 2 of Annex III, deployers that are bodies governed by public law, or
are private entities providing public services, and deployers of high-risk AI
systems referred to in points 5 (b) and (c) of Annex III, shall perform an
assessment of the impact on fundamental rights that the use of such system may
produce. For that purpose, deployers shall perform an assessment consisting
of:

(a)   a description of the deployer’s processes in which the high-risk AI system will be used in line with its intended purpose;  
  
(b)   a description of the period of time within which, and the frequency with which, each high-risk AI system is intended to be used;  
  
(c)   the categories of natural persons and groups likely to be affected by its use in the specific context;  
  
(d)   the specific risks of harm likely to have an impact on the categories of natural persons or groups of persons identified pursuant to point (c) of this paragraph, taking into account the information given by the provider pursuant to Article 13;  
  
(e)   a description of the implementation of human oversight measures, according to the instructions for use;  
  
(f)   the measures to be taken in the case of the materialisation of those risks, including the arrangements for internal governance and complaint mechanisms.  
  
  
2.  The obligation laid down in paragraph 1 applies to the first use of the
high-risk AI system. The deployer may, in similar cases, rely on previously
conducted fundamental rights impact assessments or existing impact assessments
carried out by provider. If, during the use of the high-risk AI system, the
deployer considers that any of the elements listed in paragraph 1 has changed
or is no longer up to date, the deployer shall take the necessary steps to
update the information.

3.  Once the assessment referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article has been
performed, the deployer shall notify the market surveillance authority of its
results, submitting the filled-out template referred to in paragraph 5 of this
Article as part of the notification. In the case referred to in Article 46(1),
deployers may be exempt from that obligation to notify.

4.  If any of the obligations laid down in this Article is already met through
the data protection impact assessment conducted pursuant to Article 35 of
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 or Article 27 of Directive (EU) 2016/680, the
fundamental rights impact assessment referred to in paragraph 1 of this
Article shall complement that data protection impact assessment.

5.  The AI Office shall develop a template for a questionnaire, including
through an automated tool, to facilitate deployers in complying with their
obligations under this Article in a simplified manner.

SECTION 4

Notifying authorities and notified bodies

Article 28

Notifying authorities

1.  Each Member State shall designate or establish at least one notifying
authority responsible for setting up and carrying out the necessary procedures
for the assessment, designation and notification of conformity assessment
bodies and for their monitoring. Those procedures shall be developed in
cooperation between the notifying authorities of all Member States.

2.  Member States may decide that the assessment and monitoring referred to in
paragraph 1 is to be carried out by a national accreditation body within the
meaning of, and in accordance with, Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.

3.  Notifying authorities shall be established, organised and operated in such
a way that no conflict of interest arises with conformity assessment bodies,
and that the objectivity and impartiality of their activities are safeguarded.

4.  Notifying authorities shall be organised in such a way that decisions
relating to the notification of conformity assessment bodies are taken by
competent persons different from those who carried out the assessment of those
bodies.

5.  Notifying authorities shall offer or provide neither any activities that
conformity assessment bodies perform, nor any consultancy services on a
commercial or competitive basis.

6.  Notifying authorities shall safeguard the confidentiality of the
information that they obtain, in accordance with Article 78.

7.  Notifying authorities shall have an adequate number of competent personnel
at their disposal for the proper performance of their tasks. Competent
personnel shall have the necessary expertise, where applicable, for their
function, in fields such as information technologies, AI and law, including
the supervision of fundamental rights.

Article 29

Application of a conformity assessment body for notification

1.  Conformity assessment bodies shall submit an application for notification
to the notifying authority of the Member State in which they are established.

2.  The application for notification shall be accompanied by a description of
the conformity assessment activities, the conformity assessment module or
modules and the types of AI systems for which the conformity assessment body
claims to be competent, as well as by an accreditation certificate, where one
exists, issued by a national accreditation body attesting that the conformity
assessment body fulfils the requirements laid down in Article 31.

Any valid document related to existing designations of the applicant notified
body under any other Union harmonisation legislation shall be added.

3.  Where the conformity assessment body concerned cannot provide an
accreditation certificate, it shall provide the notifying authority with all
the documentary evidence necessary for the verification, recognition and
regular monitoring of its compliance with the requirements laid down in
Article 31.

4.  For notified bodies which are designated under any other Union
harmonisation legislation, all documents and certificates linked to those
designations may be used to support their designation procedure under this
Regulation, as appropriate. The notified body shall update the documentation
referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article whenever relevant changes
occur, in order to enable the authority responsible for notified bodies to
monitor and verify continuous compliance with all the requirements laid down
in Article 31.

Article 30

Notification procedure

1.  Notifying authorities may notify only conformity assessment bodies which
have satisfied the requirements laid down in Article 31.

2.  Notifying authorities shall notify the Commission and the other Member
States, using the electronic notification tool developed and managed by the
Commission, of each conformity assessment body referred to in paragraph 1.

3.  The notification referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article shall include
full details of the conformity assessment activities, the conformity
assessment module or modules, the types of AI systems concerned, and the
relevant attestation of competence. Where a notification is not based on an
accreditation certificate as referred to in Article 29(2), the notifying
authority shall provide the Commission and the other Member States with
documentary evidence which attests to the competence of the conformity
assessment body and to the arrangements in place to ensure that that body will
be monitored regularly and will continue to satisfy the requirements laid down
in Article 31.

4.  The conformity assessment body concerned may perform the activities of a
notified body only where no objections are raised by the Commission or the
other Member States within two weeks of a notification by a notifying
authority where it includes an accreditation certificate referred to in
Article 29(2), or within two months of a notification by the notifying
authority where it includes documentary evidence referred to in Article 29(3).

5.  Where objections are raised, the Commission shall, without delay, enter
into consultations with the relevant Member States and the conformity
assessment body. In view thereof, the Commission shall decide whether the
authorisation is justified. The Commission shall address its decision to the
Member State concerned and to the relevant conformity assessment body.

Article 31

Requirements relating to notified bodies

1.  A notified body shall be established under the national law of a Member
State and shall have legal personality.

2.  Notified bodies shall satisfy the organisational, quality management,
resources and process requirements that are necessary to fulfil their tasks,
as well as suitable cybersecurity requirements.

3.  The organisational structure, allocation of responsibilities, reporting
lines and operation of notified bodies shall ensure confidence in their
performance, and in the results of the conformity assessment activities that
the notified bodies conduct.

4.  Notified bodies shall be independent of the provider of a high-risk AI
system in relation to which they perform conformity assessment activities.
Notified bodies shall also be independent of any other operator having an
economic interest in high-risk AI systems assessed, as well as of any
competitors of the provider. This shall not preclude the use of assessed high-
risk AI systems that are necessary for the operations of the conformity
assessment body, or the use of such high-risk AI systems for personal
purposes.

5.  Neither a conformity assessment body, its top-level management nor the
personnel responsible for carrying out its conformity assessment tasks shall
be directly involved in the design, development, marketing or use of high-risk
AI systems, nor shall they represent the parties engaged in those activities.
They shall not engage in any activity that might conflict with their
independence of judgement or integrity in relation to conformity assessment
activities for which they are notified. This shall, in particular, apply to
consultancy services.

6.  Notified bodies shall be organised and operated so as to safeguard the
independence, objectivity and impartiality of their activities. Notified
bodies shall document and implement a structure and procedures to safeguard
impartiality and to promote and apply the principles of impartiality
throughout their organisation, personnel and assessment activities.

7.  Notified bodies shall have documented procedures in place ensuring that
their personnel, committees, subsidiaries, subcontractors and any associated
body or personnel of external bodies maintain, in accordance with Article 78,
the confidentiality of the information which comes into their possession
during the performance of conformity assessment activities, except when its
disclosure is required by law. The staff of notified bodies shall be bound to
observe professional secrecy with regard to all information obtained in
carrying out their tasks under this Regulation, except in relation to the
notifying authorities of the Member State in which their activities are
carried out.

8.  Notified bodies shall have procedures for the performance of activities
which take due account of the size of a provider, the sector in which it
operates, its structure, and the degree of complexity of the AI system
concerned.

9.  Notified bodies shall take out appropriate liability insurance for their
conformity assessment activities, unless liability is assumed by the Member
State in which they are established in accordance with national law or that
Member State is itself directly responsible for the conformity assessment.

10.  Notified bodies shall be capable of carrying out all their tasks under
this Regulation with the highest degree of professional integrity and the
requisite competence in the specific field, whether those tasks are carried
out by notified bodies themselves or on their behalf and under their
responsibility.

11.  Notified bodies shall have sufficient internal competences to be able
effectively to evaluate the tasks conducted by external parties on their
behalf. The notified body shall have permanent availability of sufficient
administrative, technical, legal and scientific personnel who possess
experience and knowledge relating to the relevant types of AI systems, data
and data computing, and relating to the requirements set out in Section 2.

12.  Notified bodies shall participate in coordination activities as referred
to in Article 38. They shall also take part directly, or be represented in,
European standardisation organisations, or ensure that they are aware and up
to date in respect of relevant standards.

Article 32

Presumption of conformity with requirements relating to notified bodies

Where a conformity assessment body demonstrates its conformity with the
criteria laid down in the relevant harmonised standards or parts thereof, the
references of which have been published in the Official Journal of the
European Union, it shall be presumed to comply with the requirements set out
in Article 31 in so far as the applicable harmonised standards cover those
requirements.

Article 33

Subsidiaries of notified bodies and subcontracting

1.  Where a notified body subcontracts specific tasks connected with the
conformity assessment or has recourse to a subsidiary, it shall ensure that
the subcontractor or the subsidiary meets the requirements laid down in
Article 31, and shall inform the notifying authority accordingly.

2.  Notified bodies shall take full responsibility for the tasks performed by
any subcontractors or subsidiaries.

3.  Activities may be subcontracted or carried out by a subsidiary only with
the agreement of the provider. Notified bodies shall make a list of their
subsidiaries publicly available.

4.  The relevant documents concerning the assessment of the qualifications of
the subcontractor or the subsidiary and the work carried out by them under
this Regulation shall be kept at the disposal of the notifying authority for a
period of five years from the termination date of the subcontracting.

Article 34

Operational obligations of notified bodies

1.  Notified bodies shall verify the conformity of high-risk AI systems in
accordance with the conformity assessment procedures set out in Article 43.

2.  Notified bodies shall avoid unnecessary burdens for providers when
performing their activities, and take due account of the size of the provider,
the sector in which it operates, its structure and the degree of complexity of
the high-risk AI system concerned, in particular in view of minimising
administrative burdens and compliance costs for micro- and small enterprises
within the meaning of Recommendation 2003/361/EC. The notified body shall,
nevertheless, respect the degree of rigour and the level of protection
required for the compliance of the high-risk AI system with the requirements
of this Regulation.

3.  Notified bodies shall make available and submit upon request all relevant
documentation, including the providers’ documentation, to the notifying
authority referred to in Article 28 to allow that authority to conduct its
assessment, designation, notification and monitoring activities, and to
facilitate the assessment outlined in this Section.

Article 35

Identification numbers and lists of notified bodies

1.  The Commission shall assign a single identification number to each
notified body, even where a body is notified under more than one Union act.

2.  The Commission shall make publicly available the list of the bodies
notified under this Regulation, including their identification numbers and the
activities for which they have been notified. The Commission shall ensure that
the list is kept up to date.

Article 36

Changes to notifications

1.  The notifying authority shall notify the Commission and the other Member
States of any relevant changes to the notification of a notified body via the
electronic notification tool referred to in Article 30(2).

2.  The procedures laid down in Articles 29 and 30 shall apply to extensions
of the scope of the notification.

For changes to the notification other than extensions of its scope, the
procedures laid down in paragraphs (3) to (9) shall apply.

3.  Where a notified body decides to cease its conformity assessment
activities, it shall inform the notifying authority and the providers
concerned as soon as possible and, in the case of a planned cessation, at
least one year before ceasing its activities. The certificates of the notified
body may remain valid for a period of nine months after cessation of the
notified body’s activities, on condition that another notified body has
confirmed in writing that it will assume responsibilities for the high-risk AI
systems covered by those certificates. The latter notified body shall complete
a full assessment of the high-risk AI systems affected by the end of that
nine-month-period before issuing new certificates for those systems. Where the
notified body has ceased its activity, the notifying authority shall withdraw
the designation.

4.  Where a notifying authority has sufficient reason to consider that a
notified body no longer meets the requirements laid down in Article 31, or
that it is failing to fulfil its obligations, the notifying authority shall
without delay investigate the matter with the utmost diligence. In that
context, it shall inform the notified body concerned about the objections
raised and give it the possibility to make its views known. If the notifying
authority comes to the conclusion that the notified body no longer meets the
requirements laid down in Article 31 or that it is failing to fulfil its
obligations, it shall restrict, suspend or withdraw the designation as
appropriate, depending on the seriousness of the failure to meet those
requirements or fulfil those obligations. It shall immediately inform the
Commission and the other Member States accordingly.

5.  Where its designation has been suspended, restricted, or fully or
partially withdrawn, the notified body shall inform the providers concerned
within 10 days.

6.  In the event of the restriction, suspension or withdrawal of a
designation, the notifying authority shall take appropriate steps to ensure
that the files of the notified body concerned are kept, and to make them
available to notifying authorities in other Member States and to market
surveillance authorities at their request.

7.  In the event of the restriction, suspension or withdrawal of a
designation, the notifying authority shall:

(a)   assess the impact on the certificates issued by the notified body;  
  
(b)   submit a report on its findings to the Commission and the other Member States within three months of having notified the changes to the designation;  
  
(c)   require the notified body to suspend or withdraw, within a reasonable period of time determined by the authority, any certificates which were unduly issued, in order to ensure the continuing conformity of high-risk AI systems on the market;  
  
(d)   inform the Commission and the Member States about certificates the suspension or withdrawal of which it has required;  
  
(e)   provide the national competent authorities of the Member State in which the provider has its registered place of business with all relevant information about the certificates of which it has required the suspension or withdrawal; that authority shall take the appropriate measures, where necessary, to avoid a potential risk to health, safety or fundamental rights.  
  
  
8.  With the exception of certificates unduly issued, and where a designation
has been suspended or restricted, the certificates shall remain valid in one
of the following circumstances:

(a)   the notifying authority has confirmed, within one month of the suspension or restriction, that there is no risk to health, safety or fundamental rights in relation to certificates affected by the suspension or restriction, and the notifying authority has outlined a timeline for actions to remedy the suspension or restriction; or  
  
(b)   the notifying authority has confirmed that no certificates relevant to the suspension will be issued, amended or re-issued during the course of the suspension or restriction, and states whether the notified body has the capability of continuing to monitor and remain responsible for existing certificates issued for the period of the suspension or restriction; in the event that the notifying authority determines that the notified body does not have the capability to support existing certificates issued, the provider of the system covered by the certificate shall confirm in writing to the national competent authorities of the Member State in which it has its registered place of business, within three months of the suspension or restriction, that another qualified notified body is temporarily assuming the functions of the notified body to monitor and remain responsible for the certificates during the period of suspension or restriction.  
  
  
9.  With the exception of certificates unduly issued, and where a designation
has been withdrawn, the certificates shall remain valid for a period of nine
months under the following circumstances:

(a)   the national competent authority of the Member State in which the provider of the high-risk AI system covered by the certificate has its registered place of business has confirmed that there is no risk to health, safety or fundamental rights associated with the high-risk AI systems concerned; and  
  
(b)   another notified body has confirmed in writing that it will assume immediate responsibility for those AI systems and completes its assessment within 12 months of the withdrawal of the designation.  
  
  
In the circumstances referred to in the first subparagraph, the national
competent authority of the Member State in which the provider of the system
covered by the certificate has its place of business may extend the
provisional validity of the certificates for additional periods of three
months, which shall not exceed 12 months in total.

The national competent authority or the notified body assuming the functions
of the notified body affected by the change of designation shall immediately
inform the Commission, the other Member States and the other notified bodies
thereof.

Article 37

Challenge to the competence of notified bodies

1.  The Commission shall, where necessary, investigate all cases where there
are reasons to doubt the competence of a notified body or the continued
fulfilment by a notified body of the requirements laid down in Article 31 and
of its applicable responsibilities.

2.  The notifying authority shall provide the Commission, on request, with all
relevant information relating to the notification or the maintenance of the
competence of the notified body concerned.

3.  The Commission shall ensure that all sensitive information obtained in the
course of its investigations pursuant to this Article is treated
confidentially in accordance with Article 78.

4.  Where the Commission ascertains that a notified body does not meet or no
longer meets the requirements for its notification, it shall inform the
notifying Member State accordingly and request it to take the necessary
corrective measures, including the suspension or withdrawal of the
notification if necessary. Where the Member State fails to take the necessary
corrective measures, the Commission may, by means of an implementing act,
suspend, restrict or withdraw the designation. That implementing act shall be
adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article
98(2).

Article 38

Coordination of notified bodies

1.  The Commission shall ensure that, with regard to high-risk AI systems,
appropriate coordination and cooperation between notified bodies active in the
conformity assessment procedures pursuant to this Regulation are put in place
and properly operated in the form of a sectoral group of notified bodies.

2.  Each notifying authority shall ensure that the bodies notified by it
participate in the work of a group referred to in paragraph 1, directly or
through designated representatives.

3.  The Commission shall provide for the exchange of knowledge and best
practices between notifying authorities.

Article 39

Conformity assessment bodies of third countries

Conformity assessment bodies established under the law of a third country with
which the Union has concluded an agreement may be authorised to carry out the
activities of notified bodies under this Regulation, provided that they meet
the requirements laid down in Article 31 or they ensure an equivalent level of
compliance.

SECTION 5

Standards, conformity assessment, certificates, registration

Article 40

Harmonised standards and standardisation deliverables

1.  High-risk AI systems or general-purpose AI models which are in conformity
with harmonised standards or parts thereof the references of which have been
published in the Official Journal of the European Union in accordance with
Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 shall be presumed to be in conformity with the
requirements set out in Section 2 of this Chapter or, as applicable, with the
obligations set out in of Chapter V, Sections 2 and 3, of this Regulation, to
the extent that those standards cover those requirements or obligations.

2.  In accordance with Article 10 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012, the
Commission shall issue, without undue delay, standardisation requests covering
all requirements set out in Section 2 of this Chapter and, as applicable,
standardisation requests covering obligations set out in Chapter V, Sections 2
and 3, of this Regulation. The standardisation request shall also ask for
deliverables on reporting and documentation processes to improve AI systems’
resource performance, such as reducing the high-risk AI system’s consumption
of energy and of other resources during its lifecycle, and on the energy-
efficient development of general-purpose AI models. When preparing a
standardisation request, the Commission shall consult the Board and relevant
stakeholders, including the advisory forum.

When issuing a standardisation request to European standardisation
organisations, the Commission shall specify that standards have to be clear,
consistent, including with the standards developed in the various sectors for
products covered by the existing Union harmonisation legislation listed in
Annex I, and aiming to ensure that high-risk AI systems or general-purpose AI
models placed on the market or put into service in the Union meet the relevant
requirements or obligations laid down in this Regulation.

The Commission shall request the European standardisation organisations to
provide evidence of their best efforts to fulfil the objectives referred to in
the first and the second subparagraph of this paragraph in accordance with
Article 24 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012.

3.  The participants in the standardisation process shall seek to promote
investment and innovation in AI, including through increasing legal certainty,
as well as the competitiveness and growth of the Union market, to contribute
to strengthening global cooperation on standardisation and taking into account
existing international standards in the field of AI that are consistent with
Union values, fundamental rights and interests, and to enhance multi-
stakeholder governance ensuring a balanced representation of interests and the
effective participation of all relevant stakeholders in accordance with
Articles 5, 6, and 7 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012.

Article 41

Common specifications

1.  The Commission may adopt, implementing acts establishing common
specifications for the requirements set out in Section 2 of this Chapter or,
as applicable, for the obligations set out in Sections 2 and 3 of Chapter V
where the following conditions have been fulfilled:

(a)   the Commission has requested, pursuant to Article 10(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012, one or more European standardisation organisations to draft a harmonised standard for the requirements set out in Section 2 of this Chapter, or, as applicable, for the obligations set out in Sections 2 and 3 of Chapter V, and:

(i)   the request has not been accepted by any of the European standardisation organisations; or  
  
(ii)   the harmonised standards addressing that request are not delivered within the deadline set in accordance with Article 10(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012; or  
  
(iii)   the relevant harmonised standards insufficiently address fundamental rights concerns; or  
  
(iv)   the harmonised standards do not comply with the request; and  
  
(b)   no reference to harmonised standards covering the requirements referred to in Section 2 of this Chapter or, as applicable, the obligations referred to in Sections 2 and 3 of Chapter V has been published in the Official Journal of the European Union in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012, and no such reference is expected to be published within a reasonable period.  
  
  
When drafting the common specifications, the Commission shall consult the
advisory forum referred to in Article 67.

The implementing acts referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph
shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in
Article 98(2).

2.  Before preparing a draft implementing act, the Commission shall inform the
committee referred to in Article 22 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 that it
considers the conditions laid down in paragraph 1 of this Article to be
fulfilled.

3.  High-risk AI systems or general-purpose AI models which are in conformity
with the common specifications referred to in paragraph 1, or parts of those
specifications, shall be presumed to be in conformity with the requirements
set out in Section 2 of this Chapter or, as applicable, to comply with the
obligations referred to in Sections 2 and 3 of Chapter V, to the extent those
common specifications cover those requirements or those obligations.

4.  Where a harmonised standard is adopted by a European standardisation
organisation and proposed to the Commission for the publication of its
reference in the Official Journal of the European Union, the Commission shall
assess the harmonised standard in accordance with Regulation (EU) No
1025/2012. When reference to a harmonised standard is published in the
Official Journal of the European Union, the Commission shall repeal the
implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1, or parts thereof which cover the
same requirements set out in Section 2 of this Chapter or, as applicable, the
same obligations set out in Sections 2 and 3 of Chapter V.

5.  Where providers of high-risk AI systems or general-purpose AI models do
not comply with the common specifications referred to in paragraph 1, they
shall duly justify that they have adopted technical solutions that meet the
requirements referred to in Section 2 of this Chapter or, as applicable,
comply with the obligations set out in Sections 2 and 3 of Chapter V to a
level at least equivalent thereto.

6.  Where a Member State considers that a common specification does not
entirely meet the requirements set out in Section 2 or, as applicable, comply
with obligations set out in Sections 2 and 3 of Chapter V, it shall inform the
Commission thereof with a detailed explanation. The Commission shall assess
that information and, if appropriate, amend the implementing act establishing
the common specification concerned.

Article 42

Presumption of conformity with certain requirements

1.  High-risk AI systems that have been trained and tested on data reflecting
the specific geographical, behavioural, contextual or functional setting
within which they are intended to be used shall be presumed to comply with the
relevant requirements laid down in Article 10(4).

2.  High-risk AI systems that have been certified or for which a statement of
conformity has been issued under a cybersecurity scheme pursuant to Regulation
(EU) 2019/881 and the references of which have been published in the Official
Journal of the European Union shall be presumed to comply with the
cybersecurity requirements set out in Article 15 of this Regulation in so far
as the cybersecurity certificate or statement of conformity or parts thereof
cover those requirements.

Article 43

Conformity assessment

1.  For high-risk AI systems listed in point 1 of Annex III, where, in
demonstrating the compliance of a high-risk AI system with the requirements
set out in Section 2, the provider has applied harmonised standards referred
to in Article 40, or, where applicable, common specifications referred to in
Article 41, the provider shall opt for one of the following conformity
assessment procedures based on:

(a)   the internal control referred to in Annex VI; or  
  
(b)   the assessment of the quality management system and the assessment of the technical documentation, with the involvement of a notified body, referred to in Annex VII.  
  
  
In demonstrating the compliance of a high-risk AI system with the requirements
set out in Section 2, the provider shall follow the conformity assessment
procedure set out in Annex VII where:

(a)   harmonised standards referred to in Article 40 do not exist, and common specifications referred to in Article 41 are not available;  
  
(b)   the provider has not applied, or has applied only part of, the harmonised standard;  
  
(c)   the common specifications referred to in point (a) exist, but the provider has not applied them;  
  
(d)   one or more of the harmonised standards referred to in point (a) has been published with a restriction, and only on the part of the standard that was restricted.  
  
  
For the purposes of the conformity assessment procedure referred to in Annex
VII, the provider may choose any of the notified bodies. However, where the
high-risk AI system is intended to be put into service by law enforcement,
immigration or asylum authorities or by Union institutions, bodies, offices or
agencies, the market surveillance authority referred to in Article 74(8) or
(9), as applicable, shall act as a notified body.

2.  For high-risk AI systems referred to in points 2 to 8 of Annex III,
providers shall follow the conformity assessment procedure based on internal
control as referred to in Annex VI, which does not provide for the involvement
of a notified body.

3.  For high-risk AI systems covered by the Union harmonisation legislation
listed in Section A of Annex I, the provider shall follow the relevant
conformity assessment procedure as required under those legal acts. The
requirements set out in Section 2 of this Chapter shall apply to those high-
risk AI systems and shall be part of that assessment. Points 4.3., 4.4., 4.5.
and the fifth paragraph of point 4.6 of Annex VII shall also apply.

For the purposes of that assessment, notified bodies which have been notified
under those legal acts shall be entitled to control the conformity of the
high-risk AI systems with the requirements set out in Section 2, provided that
the compliance of those notified bodies with requirements laid down in Article
31(4), (5), (10) and (11) has been assessed in the context of the notification
procedure under those legal acts.

Where a legal act listed in Section A of Annex I enables the product
manufacturer to opt out from a third-party conformity assessment, provided
that that manufacturer has applied all harmonised standards covering all the
relevant requirements, that manufacturer may use that option only if it has
also applied harmonised standards or, where applicable, common specifications
referred to in Article 41, covering all requirements set out in Section 2 of
this Chapter.

4.  High-risk AI systems that have already been subject to a conformity
assessment procedure shall undergo a new conformity assessment procedure in
the event of a substantial modification, regardless of whether the modified
system is intended to be further distributed or continues to be used by the
current deployer.

For high-risk AI systems that continue to learn after being placed on the
market or put into service, changes to the high-risk AI system and its
performance that have been pre-determined by the provider at the moment of the
initial conformity assessment and are part of the information contained in the
technical documentation referred to in point 2(f) of Annex IV, shall not
constitute a substantial modification.

5.  The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with
Article 97 in order to amend Annexes VI and VII by updating them in light of
technical progress.

6.  The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with
Article 97 in order to amend paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article in order to
subject high-risk AI systems referred to in points 2 to 8 of Annex III to the
conformity assessment procedure referred to in Annex VII or parts thereof. The
Commission shall adopt such delegated acts taking into account the
effectiveness of the conformity assessment procedure based on internal control
referred to in Annex VI in preventing or minimising the risks to health and
safety and protection of fundamental rights posed by such systems, as well as
the availability of adequate capacities and resources among notified bodies.

Article 44

Certificates

1.  Certificates issued by notified bodies in accordance with Annex VII shall
be drawn-up in a language which can be easily understood by the relevant
authorities in the Member State in which the notified body is established.

2.  Certificates shall be valid for the period they indicate, which shall not
exceed five years for AI systems covered by Annex I, and four years for AI
systems covered by Annex III. At the request of the provider, the validity of
a certificate may be extended for further periods, each not exceeding five
years for AI systems covered by Annex I, and four years for AI systems covered
by Annex III, based on a re-assessment in accordance with the applicable
conformity assessment procedures. Any supplement to a certificate shall remain
valid, provided that the certificate which it supplements is valid.

3.  Where a notified body finds that an AI system no longer meets the
requirements set out in Section 2, it shall, taking account of the principle
of proportionality, suspend or withdraw the certificate issued or impose
restrictions on it, unless compliance with those requirements is ensured by
appropriate corrective action taken by the provider of the system within an
appropriate deadline set by the notified body. The notified body shall give
reasons for its decision.

An appeal procedure against decisions of the notified bodies, including on
conformity certificates issued, shall be available.

Article 45

Information obligations of notified bodies

1.  Notified bodies shall inform the notifying authority of the following:

(a)   any Union technical documentation assessment certificates, any supplements to those certificates, and any quality management system approvals issued in accordance with the requirements of Annex VII;  
  
(b)   any refusal, restriction, suspension or withdrawal of a Union technical documentation assessment certificate or a quality management system approval issued in accordance with the requirements of Annex VII;  
  
(c)   any circumstances affecting the scope of or conditions for notification;  
  
(d)   any request for information which they have received from market surveillance authorities regarding conformity assessment activities;  
  
(e)   on request, conformity assessment activities performed within the scope of their notification and any other activity performed, including cross-border activities and subcontracting.  
  
  
2.  Each notified body shall inform the other notified bodies of:

(a)   quality management system approvals which it has refused, suspended or withdrawn, and, upon request, of quality system approvals which it has issued;  
  
(b)   Union technical documentation assessment certificates or any supplements thereto which it has refused, withdrawn, suspended or otherwise restricted, and, upon request, of the certificates and/or supplements thereto which it has issued.  
  
  
3.  Each notified body shall provide the other notified bodies carrying out
similar conformity assessment activities covering the same types of AI systems
with relevant information on issues relating to negative and, on request,
positive conformity assessment results.

4.  Notified bodies shall safeguard the confidentiality of the information
that they obtain, in accordance with Article 78.

Article 46

Derogation from conformity assessment procedure

1.  By way of derogation from Article 43 and upon a duly justified request,
any market surveillance authority may authorise the placing on the market or
the putting into service of specific high-risk AI systems within the territory
of the Member State concerned, for exceptional reasons of public security or
the protection of life and health of persons, environmental protection or the
protection of key industrial and infrastructural assets. That authorisation
shall be for a limited period while the necessary conformity assessment
procedures are being carried out, taking into account the exceptional reasons
justifying the derogation. The completion of those procedures shall be
undertaken without undue delay.

2.  In a duly justified situation of urgency for exceptional reasons of public
security or in the case of specific, substantial and imminent threat to the
life or physical safety of natural persons, law-enforcement authorities or
civil protection authorities may put a specific high-risk AI system into
service without the authorisation referred to in paragraph 1, provided that
such authorisation is requested during or after the use without undue delay.
If the authorisation referred to in paragraph 1 is refused, the use of the
high-risk AI system shall be stopped with immediate effect and all the results
and outputs of such use shall be immediately discarded.

3.  The authorisation referred to in paragraph 1 shall be issued only if the
market surveillance authority concludes that the high-risk AI system complies
with the requirements of Section 2. The market surveillance authority shall
inform the Commission and the other Member States of any authorisation issued
pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2. This obligation shall not cover sensitive
operational data in relation to the activities of law-enforcement authorities.

4.  Where, within 15 calendar days of receipt of the information referred to
in paragraph 3, no objection has been raised by either a Member State or the
Commission in respect of an authorisation issued by a market surveillance
authority of a Member State in accordance with paragraph 1, that authorisation
shall be deemed justified.

5.  Where, within 15 calendar days of receipt of the notification referred to
in paragraph 3, objections are raised by a Member State against an
authorisation issued by a market surveillance authority of another Member
State, or where the Commission considers the authorisation to be contrary to
Union law, or the conclusion of the Member States regarding the compliance of
the system as referred to in paragraph 3 to be unfounded, the Commission
shall, without delay, enter into consultations with the relevant Member State.
The operators concerned shall be consulted and have the possibility to present
their views. Having regard thereto, the Commission shall decide whether the
authorisation is justified. The Commission shall address its decision to the
Member State concerned and to the relevant operators.

6.  Where the Commission considers the authorisation unjustified, it shall be
withdrawn by the market surveillance authority of the Member State concerned.

7.  For high-risk AI systems related to products covered by Union
harmonisation legislation listed in Section A of Annex I, only the derogations
from the conformity assessment established in that Union harmonisation
legislation shall apply.

Article 47

EU declaration of conformity

1.  The provider shall draw up a written machine readable, physical or
electronically signed EU declaration of conformity for each high-risk AI
system, and keep it at the disposal of the national competent authorities for
10 years after the high-risk AI system has been placed on the market or put
into service. The EU declaration of conformity shall identify the high-risk AI
system for which it has been drawn up. A copy of the EU declaration of
conformity shall be submitted to the relevant national competent authorities
upon request.

2.  The EU declaration of conformity shall state that the high-risk AI system
concerned meets the requirements set out in Section 2. The EU declaration of
conformity shall contain the information set out in Annex V, and shall be
translated into a language that can be easily understood by the national
competent authorities of the Member States in which the high-risk AI system is
placed on the market or made available.

3.  Where high-risk AI systems are subject to other Union harmonisation
legislation which also requires an EU declaration of conformity, a single EU
declaration of conformity shall be drawn up in respect of all Union law
applicable to the high-risk AI system. The declaration shall contain all the
information required to identify the Union harmonisation legislation to which
the declaration relates.

4.  By drawing up the EU declaration of conformity, the provider shall assume
responsibility for compliance with the requirements set out in Section 2. The
provider shall keep the EU declaration of conformity up-to-date as
appropriate.

5.  The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with
Article 97 in order to amend Annex V by updating the content of the EU
declaration of conformity set out in that Annex, in order to introduce
elements that become necessary in light of technical progress.

Article 48

CE marking

1.  The CE marking shall be subject to the general principles set out in
Article 30 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.

2.  For high-risk AI systems provided digitally, a digital CE marking shall be
used, only if it can easily be accessed via the interface from which that
system is accessed or via an easily accessible machine-readable code or other
electronic means.

3.  The CE marking shall be affixed visibly, legibly and indelibly for high-
risk AI systems. Where that is not possible or not warranted on account of the
nature of the high-risk AI system, it shall be affixed to the packaging or to
the accompanying documentation, as appropriate.

4.  Where applicable, the CE marking shall be followed by the identification
number of the notified body responsible for the conformity assessment
procedures set out in Article 43. The identification number of the notified
body shall be affixed by the body itself or, under its instructions, by the
provider or by the provider’s authorised representative. The identification
number shall also be indicated in any promotional material which mentions that
the high-risk AI system fulfils the requirements for CE marking.

5.  Where high-risk AI systems are subject to other Union law which also
provides for the affixing of the CE marking, the CE marking shall indicate
that the high-risk AI system also fulfil the requirements of that other law.

Article 49

Registration

1.  Before placing on the market or putting into service a high-risk AI system
listed in Annex III, with the exception of high-risk AI systems referred to in
point 2 of Annex III, the provider or, where applicable, the authorised
representative shall register themselves and their system in the EU database
referred to in Article 71.

2.  Before placing on the market or putting into service an AI system for
which the provider has concluded that it is not high-risk according to Article
6(3), that provider or, where applicable, the authorised representative shall
register themselves and that system in the EU database referred to in Article
71.

3.  Before putting into service or using a high-risk AI system listed in Annex
III, with the exception of high-risk AI systems listed in point 2 of Annex
III, deployers that are public authorities, Union institutions, bodies,
offices or agencies or persons acting on their behalf shall register
themselves, select the system and register its use in the EU database referred
to in Article 71.

4.  For high-risk AI systems referred to in points 1, 6 and 7 of Annex III, in
the areas of law enforcement, migration, asylum and border control management,
the registration referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article shall be
in a secure non-public section of the EU database referred to in Article 71
and shall include only the following information, as applicable, referred to
in:

(a)   Section A, points 1 to 10, of Annex VIII, with the exception of points 6, 8 and 9;  
  
(b)   Section B, points 1 to 5, and points 8 and 9 of Annex VIII;  
  
(c)   Section C, points 1 to 3, of Annex VIII;  
  
(d)   points 1, 2, 3 and 5, of Annex IX.  
  
  
Only the Commission and national authorities referred to in Article 74(8)
shall have access to the respective restricted sections of the EU database
listed in the first subparagraph of this paragraph.

5.  High-risk AI systems referred to in point 2 of Annex III shall be
registered at national level.

CHAPTER IV

TRANSPARENCY OBLIGATIONS FOR PROVIDERS AND DEPLOYERS OF CERTAIN AI SYSTEMS

Article 50

Transparency obligations for providers and deployers of certain AI systems

1.  Providers shall ensure that AI systems intended to interact directly with
natural persons are designed and developed in such a way that the natural
persons concerned are informed that they are interacting with an AI system,
unless this is obvious from the point of view of a natural person who is
reasonably well-informed, observant and circumspect, taking into account the
circumstances and the context of use. This obligation shall not apply to AI
systems authorised by law to detect, prevent, investigate or prosecute
criminal offences, subject to appropriate safeguards for the rights and
freedoms of third parties, unless those systems are available for the public
to report a criminal offence.

2.  Providers of AI systems, including general-purpose AI systems, generating
synthetic audio, image, video or text content, shall ensure that the outputs
of the AI system are marked in a machine-readable format and detectable as
artificially generated or manipulated. Providers shall ensure their technical
solutions are effective, interoperable, robust and reliable as far as this is
technically feasible, taking into account the specificities and limitations of
various types of content, the costs of implementation and the generally
acknowledged state of the art, as may be reflected in relevant technical
standards. This obligation shall not apply to the extent the AI systems
perform an assistive function for standard editing or do not substantially
alter the input data provided by the deployer or the semantics thereof, or
where authorised by law to detect, prevent, investigate or prosecute criminal
offences.

3.  Deployers of an emotion recognition system or a biometric categorisation
system shall inform the natural persons exposed thereto of the operation of
the system, and shall process the personal data in accordance with Regulations
(EU) 2016/679 and (EU) 2018/1725 and Directive (EU) 2016/680, as applicable.
This obligation shall not apply to AI systems used for biometric
categorisation and emotion recognition, which are permitted by law to detect,
prevent or investigate criminal offences, subject to appropriate safeguards
for the rights and freedoms of third parties, and in accordance with Union
law.

4.  Deployers of an AI system that generates or manipulates image, audio or
video content constituting a deep fake, shall disclose that the content has
been artificially generated or manipulated. This obligation shall not apply
where the use is authorised by law to detect, prevent, investigate or
prosecute criminal offence. Where the content forms part of an evidently
artistic, creative, satirical, fictional or analogous work or programme, the
transparency obligations set out in this paragraph are limited to disclosure
of the existence of such generated or manipulated content in an appropriate
manner that does not hamper the display or enjoyment of the work.

Deployers of an AI system that generates or manipulates text which is
published with the purpose of informing the public on matters of public
interest shall disclose that the text has been artificially generated or
manipulated. This obligation shall not apply where the use is authorised by
law to detect, prevent, investigate or prosecute criminal offences or where
the AI-generated content has undergone a process of human review or editorial
control and where a natural or legal person holds editorial responsibility for
the publication of the content.

5.  The information referred to in paragraphs 1 to 4 shall be provided to the
natural persons concerned in a clear and distinguishable manner at the latest
at the time of the first interaction or exposure. The information shall
conform to the applicable accessibility requirements.

6.  Paragraphs 1 to 4 shall not affect the requirements and obligations set
out in Chapter III, and shall be without prejudice to other transparency
obligations laid down in Union or national law for deployers of AI systems.

7.  The AI Office shall encourage and facilitate the drawing up of codes of
practice at Union level to facilitate the effective implementation of the
obligations regarding the detection and labelling of artificially generated or
manipulated content. The Commission may adopt implementing acts to approve
those codes of practice in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article
56 (6). If it deems the code is not adequate, the Commission may adopt an
implementing act specifying common rules for the implementation of those
obligations in accordance with the examination procedure laid down in Article
98(2).

CHAPTER V

GENERAL-PURPOSE AI MODELS

SECTION 1

Classification rules

Article 51

Classification of general-purpose AI models as general-purpose AI models with
systemic risk

1.  A general-purpose AI model shall be classified as a general-purpose AI
model with systemic risk if it meets any of the following conditions:

(a)   it has high impact capabilities evaluated on the basis of appropriate technical tools and methodologies, including indicators and benchmarks;  
  
(b)   based on a decision of the Commission, ex officio or following a qualified alert from the scientific panel, it has capabilities or an impact equivalent to those set out in point (a) having regard to the criteria set out in Annex XIII.  
  
  
2.  A general-purpose AI model shall be presumed to have high impact
capabilities pursuant to paragraph 1, point (a), when the cumulative amount of
computation used for its training measured in floating point operations is
greater than 1025.

3.  The Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 97 to
amend the thresholds listed in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, as well as
to supplement benchmarks and indicators in light of evolving technological
developments, such as algorithmic improvements or increased hardware
efficiency, when necessary, for these thresholds to reflect the state of the
art.

Article 52

Procedure

1.  Where a general-purpose AI model meets the condition referred to in
Article 51(1), point (a), the relevant provider shall notify the Commission
without delay and in any event within two weeks after that requirement is met
or it becomes known that it will be met. That notification shall include the
information necessary to demonstrate that the relevant requirement has been
met. If the Commission becomes aware of a general-purpose AI model presenting
systemic risks of which it has not been notified, it may decide to designate
it as a model with systemic risk.

2.  The provider of a general-purpose AI model that meets the condition
referred to in Article 51(1), point (a), may present, with its notification,
sufficiently substantiated arguments to demonstrate that, exceptionally,
although it meets that requirement, the general-purpose AI model does not
present, due to its specific characteristics, systemic risks and therefore
should not be classified as a general-purpose AI model with systemic risk.

3.  Where the Commission concludes that the arguments submitted pursuant to
paragraph 2 are not sufficiently substantiated and the relevant provider was
not able to demonstrate that the general-purpose AI model does not present,
due to its specific characteristics, systemic risks, it shall reject those
arguments, and the general-purpose AI model shall be considered to be a
general-purpose AI model with systemic risk.

4.  The Commission may designate a general-purpose AI model as presenting
systemic risks, ex officio or following a qualified alert from the scientific
panel pursuant to Article 90(1), point (a), on the basis of criteria set out
in Annex XIII.

The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article
97 in order to amend Annex XIII by specifying and updating the criteria set
out in that Annex.

5.  Upon a reasoned request of a provider whose model has been designated as a
general-purpose AI model with systemic risk pursuant to paragraph 4, the
Commission shall take the request into account and may decide to reassess
whether the general-purpose AI model can still be considered to present
systemic risks on the basis of the criteria set out in Annex XIII. Such a
request shall contain objective, detailed and new reasons that have arisen
since the designation decision. Providers may request reassessment at the
earliest six months after the designation decision. Where the Commission,
following its reassessment, decides to maintain the designation as a general-
purpose AI model with systemic risk, providers may request reassessment at the
earliest six months after that decision.

6.  The Commission shall ensure that a list of general-purpose AI models with
systemic risk is published and shall keep that list up to date, without
prejudice to the need to observe and protect intellectual property rights and
confidential business information or trade secrets in accordance with Union
and national law.

SECTION 2

Obligations for providers of general-purpose AI models

Article 53

Obligations for providers of general-purpose AI models

1.  Providers of general-purpose AI models shall:

(a)   draw up and keep up-to-date the technical documentation of the model, including its training and testing process and the results of its evaluation, which shall contain, at a minimum, the information set out in Annex XI for the purpose of providing it, upon request, to the AI Office and the national competent authorities;  
  
(b)   draw up, keep up-to-date and make available information and documentation to providers of AI systems who intend to integrate the general-purpose AI model into their AI systems. Without prejudice to the need to observe and protect intellectual property rights and confidential business information or trade secrets in accordance with Union and national law, the information and documentation shall:

(i)   enable providers of AI systems to have a good understanding of the capabilities and limitations of the general-purpose AI model and to comply with their obligations pursuant to this Regulation; and  
  
(ii)   contain, at a minimum, the elements set out in Annex XII;  
  
(c)   put in place a policy to comply with Union law on copyright and related rights, and in particular to identify and comply with, including through state-of-the-art technologies, a reservation of rights expressed pursuant to Article 4(3) of Directive (EU) 2019/790;  
  
(d)   draw up and make publicly available a sufficiently detailed summary about the content used for training of the general-purpose AI model, according to a template provided by the AI Office.  
  
  
2.  The obligations set out in paragraph 1, points (a) and (b), shall not
apply to providers of AI models that are released under a free and open-source
licence that allows for the access, usage, modification, and distribution of
the model, and whose parameters, including the weights, the information on the
model architecture, and the information on model usage, are made publicly
available. This exception shall not apply to general-purpose AI models with
systemic risks.

3.  Providers of general-purpose AI models shall cooperate as necessary with
the Commission and the national competent authorities in the exercise of their
competences and powers pursuant to this Regulation.

4.  Providers of general-purpose AI models may rely on codes of practice
within the meaning of Article 56 to demonstrate compliance with the
obligations set out in paragraph 1 of this Article, until a harmonised
standard is published. Compliance with European harmonised standards grants
providers the presumption of conformity to the extent that those standards
cover those obligations. Providers of general-purpose AI models who do not
adhere to an approved code of practice or do not comply with a European
harmonised standard shall demonstrate alternative adequate means of compliance
for assessment by the Commission.

5.  For the purpose of facilitating compliance with Annex XI, in particular
points 2 (d) and (e) thereof, the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated
acts in accordance with Article 97 to detail measurement and calculation
methodologies with a view to allowing for comparable and verifiable
documentation.

6.  The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with
Article 97(2) to amend Annexes XI and XII in light of evolving technological
developments.

7.  Any information or documentation obtained pursuant to this Article,
including trade secrets, shall be treated in accordance with the
confidentiality obligations set out in Article 78.

Article 54

Authorised representatives of providers of general-purpose AI models

1.  Prior to placing a general-purpose AI model on the Union market, providers
established in third countries shall, by written mandate, appoint an
authorised representative which is established in the Union.

2.  The provider shall enable its authorised representative to perform the
tasks specified in the mandate received from the provider.

3.  The authorised representative shall perform the tasks specified in the
mandate received from the provider. It shall provide a copy of the mandate to
the AI Office upon request, in one of the official languages of the
institutions of the Union. For the purposes of this Regulation, the mandate
shall empower the authorised representative to carry out the following tasks:

(a)   verify that the technical documentation specified in Annex XI has been drawn up and all obligations referred to in Article 53 and, where applicable, Article 55 have been fulfilled by the provider;  
  
(b)   keep a copy of the technical documentation specified in Annex XI at the disposal of the AI Office and national competent authorities, for a period of 10 years after the general-purpose AI model has been placed on the market, and the contact details of the provider that appointed the authorised representative;  
  
(c)   provide the AI Office, upon a reasoned request, with all the information and documentation, including that referred to in point (b), necessary to demonstrate compliance with the obligations in this Chapter;  
  
(d)   cooperate with the AI Office and competent authorities, upon a reasoned request, in any action they take in relation to the general-purpose AI model, including when the model is integrated into AI systems placed on the market or put into service in the Union.  
  
  
4.  The mandate shall empower the authorised representative to be addressed,
in addition to or instead of the provider, by the AI Office or the competent
authorities, on all issues related to ensuring compliance with this
Regulation.

5.  The authorised representative shall terminate the mandate if it considers
or has reason to consider the provider to be acting contrary to its
obligations pursuant to this Regulation. In such a case, it shall also
immediately inform the AI Office about the termination of the mandate and the
reasons therefor.

6.  The obligation set out in this Article shall not apply to providers of
general-purpose AI models that are released under a free and open-source
licence that allows for the access, usage, modification, and distribution of
the model, and whose parameters, including the weights, the information on the
model architecture, and the information on model usage, are made publicly
available, unless the general-purpose AI models present systemic risks.

SECTION 3

Obligations of providers of general-purpose AI models with systemic risk

Article 55

Obligations of providers of general-purpose AI models with systemic risk

1.  In addition to the obligations listed in Articles 53 and 54, providers of
general-purpose AI models with systemic risk shall:

(a)   perform model evaluation in accordance with standardised protocols and tools reflecting the state of the art, including conducting and documenting adversarial testing of the model with a view to identifying and mitigating systemic risks;  
  
(b)   assess and mitigate possible systemic risks at Union level, including their sources, that may stem from the development, the placing on the market, or the use of general-purpose AI models with systemic risk;  
  
(c)   keep track of, document, and report, without undue delay, to the AI Office and, as appropriate, to national competent authorities, relevant information about serious incidents and possible corrective measures to address them;  
  
(d)   ensure an adequate level of cybersecurity protection for the general-purpose AI model with systemic risk and the physical infrastructure of the model.  
  
  
2.  Providers of general-purpose AI models with systemic risk may rely on
codes of practice within the meaning of Article 56 to demonstrate compliance
with the obligations set out in paragraph 1 of this Article, until a
harmonised standard is published. Compliance with European harmonised
standards grants providers the presumption of conformity to the extent that
those standards cover those obligations. Providers of general-purpose AI
models with systemic risks who do not adhere to an approved code of practice
or do not comply with a European harmonised standard shall demonstrate
alternative adequate means of compliance for assessment by the Commission.

3.  Any information or documentation obtained pursuant to this Article,
including trade secrets, shall be treated in accordance with the
confidentiality obligations set out in Article 78.

SECTION 4

Codes of practice

Article 56

Codes of practice

1.  The AI Office shall encourage and facilitate the drawing up of codes of
practice at Union level in order to contribute to the proper application of
this Regulation, taking into account international approaches.

2.  The AI Office and the Board shall aim to ensure that the codes of practice
cover at least the obligations provided for in Articles 53 and 55, including
the following issues:

(a)   the means to ensure that the information referred to in Article 53(1), points (a) and (b), is kept up to date in light of market and technological developments;  
  
(b)   the adequate level of detail for the summary about the content used for training;  
  
(c)   the identification of the type and nature of the systemic risks at Union level, including their sources, where appropriate;  
  
(d)   the measures, procedures and modalities for the assessment and management of the systemic risks at Union level, including the documentation thereof, which shall be proportionate to the risks, take into consideration their severity and probability and take into account the specific challenges of tackling those risks in light of the possible ways in which such risks may emerge and materialise along the AI value chain.  
  
  
3.  The AI Office may invite all providers of general-purpose AI models, as
well as relevant national competent authorities, to participate in the
drawing-up of codes of practice. Civil society organisations, industry,
academia and other relevant stakeholders, such as downstream providers and
independent experts, may support the process.

4.  The AI Office and the Board shall aim to ensure that the codes of practice
clearly set out their specific objectives and contain commitments or measures,
including key performance indicators as appropriate, to ensure the achievement
of those objectives, and that they take due account of the needs and interests
of all interested parties, including affected persons, at Union level.

5.  The AI Office shall aim to ensure that participants to the codes of
practice report regularly to the AI Office on the implementation of the
commitments and the measures taken and their outcomes, including as measured
against the key performance indicators as appropriate. Key performance
indicators and reporting commitments shall reflect differences in size and
capacity between various participants.

6.  The AI Office and the Board shall regularly monitor and evaluate the
achievement of the objectives of the codes of practice by the participants and
their contribution to the proper application of this Regulation. The AI Office
and the Board shall assess whether the codes of practice cover the obligations
provided for in Articles 53 and 55, and shall regularly monitor and evaluate
the achievement of their objectives. They shall publish their assessment of
the adequacy of the codes of practice.

The Commission may, by way of an implementing act, approve a code of practice
and give it a general validity within the Union. That implementing act shall
be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article
98(2).

7.  The AI Office may invite all providers of general-purpose AI models to
adhere to the codes of practice. For providers of general-purpose AI models
not presenting systemic risks this adherence may be limited to the obligations
provided for in Article 53, unless they declare explicitly their interest to
join the full code.

8.  The AI Office shall, as appropriate, also encourage and facilitate the
review and adaptation of the codes of practice, in particular in light of
emerging standards. The AI Office shall assist in the assessment of available
standards.

9.  Codes of practice shall be ready at the latest by 2 May 2025. The AI
Office shall take the necessary steps, including inviting providers pursuant
to paragraph 7.

If, by 2 August 2025, a code of practice cannot be finalised, or if the AI
Office deems it is not adequate following its assessment under paragraph 6 of
this Article, the Commission may provide, by means of implementing acts,
common rules for the implementation of the obligations provided for in
Articles 53 and 55, including the issues set out in paragraph 2 of this
Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the
examination procedure referred to in Article 98(2).

CHAPTER VI

MEASURES IN SUPPORT OF INNOVATION

Article 57

AI regulatory sandboxes

1.  Member States shall ensure that their competent authorities establish at
least one AI regulatory sandbox at national level, which shall be operational
by 2 August 2026. That sandbox may also be established jointly with the
competent authorities of other Member States. The Commission may provide
technical support, advice and tools for the establishment and operation of AI
regulatory sandboxes.

The obligation under the first subparagraph may also be fulfilled by
participating in an existing sandbox in so far as that participation provides
an equivalent level of national coverage for the participating Member States.

2.  Additional AI regulatory sandboxes at regional or local level, or
established jointly with the competent authorities of other Member States may
also be established.

3.  The European Data Protection Supervisor may also establish an AI
regulatory sandbox for Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies, and
may exercise the roles and the tasks of national competent authorities in
accordance with this Chapter.

4.  Member States shall ensure that the competent authorities referred to in
paragraphs 1 and 2 allocate sufficient resources to comply with this Article
effectively and in a timely manner. Where appropriate, national competent
authorities shall cooperate with other relevant authorities, and may allow for
the involvement of other actors within the AI ecosystem. This Article shall
not affect other regulatory sandboxes established under Union or national law.
Member States shall ensure an appropriate level of cooperation between the
authorities supervising those other sandboxes and the national competent
authorities.

5.  AI regulatory sandboxes established under paragraph 1 shall provide for a
controlled environment that fosters innovation and facilitates the
development, training, testing and validation of innovative AI systems for a
limited time before their being placed on the market or put into service
pursuant to a specific sandbox plan agreed between the providers or
prospective providers and the competent authority. Such sandboxes may include
testing in real world conditions supervised therein.

6.  Competent authorities shall provide, as appropriate, guidance, supervision
and support within the AI regulatory sandbox with a view to identifying risks,
in particular to fundamental rights, health and safety, testing, mitigation
measures, and their effectiveness in relation to the obligations and
requirements of this Regulation and, where relevant, other Union and national
law supervised within the sandbox.

7.  Competent authorities shall provide providers and prospective providers
participating in the AI regulatory sandbox with guidance on regulatory
expectations and how to fulfil the requirements and obligations set out in
this Regulation.

Upon request of the provider or prospective provider of the AI system, the
competent authority shall provide a written proof of the activities
successfully carried out in the sandbox. The competent authority shall also
provide an exit report detailing the activities carried out in the sandbox and
the related results and learning outcomes. Providers may use such
documentation to demonstrate their compliance with this Regulation through the
conformity assessment process or relevant market surveillance activities. In
this regard, the exit reports and the written proof provided by the national
competent authority shall be taken positively into account by market
surveillance authorities and notified bodies, with a view to accelerating
conformity assessment procedures to a reasonable extent.

8.  Subject to the confidentiality provisions in Article 78, and with the
agreement of the provider or prospective provider, the Commission and the
Board shall be authorised to access the exit reports and shall take them into
account, as appropriate, when exercising their tasks under this Regulation. If
both the provider or prospective provider and the national competent authority
explicitly agree, the exit report may be made publicly available through the
single information platform referred to in this Article.

9.  The establishment of AI regulatory sandboxes shall aim to contribute to
the following objectives:

(a)   improving legal certainty to achieve regulatory compliance with this Regulation or, where relevant, other applicable Union and national law;  
  
(b)   supporting the sharing of best practices through cooperation with the authorities involved in the AI regulatory sandbox;  
  
(c)   fostering innovation and competitiveness and facilitating the development of an AI ecosystem;  
  
(d)   contributing to evidence-based regulatory learning;  
  
(e)   facilitating and accelerating access to the Union market for AI systems, in particular when provided by SMEs, including start-ups.  
  
  
10.  National competent authorities shall ensure that, to the extent the
innovative AI systems involve the processing of personal data or otherwise
fall under the supervisory remit of other national authorities or competent
authorities providing or supporting access to data, the national data
protection authorities and those other national or competent authorities are
associated with the operation of the AI regulatory sandbox and involved in the
supervision of those aspects to the extent of their respective tasks and
powers.

11.  The AI regulatory sandboxes shall not affect the supervisory or
corrective powers of the competent authorities supervising the sandboxes,
including at regional or local level. Any significant risks to health and
safety and fundamental rights identified during the development and testing of
such AI systems shall result in an adequate mitigation. National competent
authorities shall have the power to temporarily or permanently suspend the
testing process, or the participation in the sandbox if no effective
mitigation is possible, and shall inform the AI Office of such decision.
National competent authorities shall exercise their supervisory powers within
the limits of the relevant law, using their discretionary powers when
implementing legal provisions in respect of a specific AI regulatory sandbox
project, with the objective of supporting innovation in AI in the Union.

12.  Providers and prospective providers participating in the AI regulatory
sandbox shall remain liable under applicable Union and national liability law
for any damage inflicted on third parties as a result of the experimentation
taking place in the sandbox. However, provided that the prospective providers
observe the specific plan and the terms and conditions for their participation
and follow in good faith the guidance given by the national competent
authority, no administrative fines shall be imposed by the authorities for
infringements of this Regulation. Where other competent authorities
responsible for other Union and national law were actively involved in the
supervision of the AI system in the sandbox and provided guidance for
compliance, no administrative fines shall be imposed regarding that law.

13.  The AI regulatory sandboxes shall be designed and implemented in such a
way that, where relevant, they facilitate cross-border cooperation between
national competent authorities.

14.  National competent authorities shall coordinate their activities and
cooperate within the framework of the Board.

15.  National competent authorities shall inform the AI Office and the Board
of the establishment of a sandbox, and may ask them for support and guidance.
The AI Office shall make publicly available a list of planned and existing
sandboxes and keep it up to date in order to encourage more interaction in the
AI regulatory sandboxes and cross-border cooperation.

16.  National competent authorities shall submit annual reports to the AI
Office and to the Board, from one year after the establishment of the AI
regulatory sandbox and every year thereafter until its termination, and a
final report. Those reports shall provide information on the progress and
results of the implementation of those sandboxes, including best practices,
incidents, lessons learnt and recommendations on their setup and, where
relevant, on the application and possible revision of this Regulation,
including its delegated and implementing acts, and on the application of other
Union law supervised by the competent authorities within the sandbox. The
national competent authorities shall make those annual reports or abstracts
thereof available to the public, online. The Commission shall, where
appropriate, take the annual reports into account when exercising its tasks
under this Regulation.

17.  The Commission shall develop a single and dedicated interface containing
all relevant information related to AI regulatory sandboxes to allow
stakeholders to interact with AI regulatory sandboxes and to raise enquiries
with competent authorities, and to seek non-binding guidance on the conformity
of innovative products, services, business models embedding AI technologies,
in accordance with Article 62(1), point (c). The Commission shall proactively
coordinate with national competent authorities, where relevant.

Article 58

Detailed arrangements for, and functioning of, AI regulatory sandboxes

1.  In order to avoid fragmentation across the Union, the Commission shall
adopt implementing acts specifying the detailed arrangements for the
establishment, development, implementation, operation and supervision of the
AI regulatory sandboxes. The implementing acts shall include common principles
on the following issues:

(a)   eligibility and selection criteria for participation in the AI regulatory sandbox;  
  
(b)   procedures for the application, participation, monitoring, exiting from and termination of the AI regulatory sandbox, including the sandbox plan and the exit report;  
  
(c)   the terms and conditions applicable to the participants.  
  
  
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination
procedure referred to in Article 98(2).

2.  The implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1 shall ensure:

(a)   that AI regulatory sandboxes are open to any applying provider or prospective provider of an AI system who fulfils eligibility and selection criteria, which shall be transparent and fair, and that national competent authorities inform applicants of their decision within three months of the application;  
  
(b)   that AI regulatory sandboxes allow broad and equal access and keep up with demand for participation; providers and prospective providers may also submit applications in partnerships with deployers and other relevant third parties;  
  
(c)   that the detailed arrangements for, and conditions concerning AI regulatory sandboxes support, to the best extent possible, flexibility for national competent authorities to establish and operate their AI regulatory sandboxes;  
  
(d)   that access to the AI regulatory sandboxes is free of charge for SMEs, including start-ups, without prejudice to exceptional costs that national competent authorities may recover in a fair and proportionate manner;  
  
(e)   that they facilitate providers and prospective providers, by means of the learning outcomes of the AI regulatory sandboxes, in complying with conformity assessment obligations under this Regulation and the voluntary application of the codes of conduct referred to in Article 95;  
  
(f)   that AI regulatory sandboxes facilitate the involvement of other relevant actors within the AI ecosystem, such as notified bodies and standardisation organisations, SMEs, including start-ups, enterprises, innovators, testing and experimentation facilities, research and experimentation labs and European Digital Innovation Hubs, centres of excellence, individual researchers, in order to allow and facilitate cooperation with the public and private sectors;  
  
(g)   that procedures, processes and administrative requirements for application, selection, participation and exiting the AI regulatory sandbox are simple, easily intelligible, and clearly communicated in order to facilitate the participation of SMEs, including start-ups, with limited legal and administrative capacities and are streamlined across the Union, in order to avoid fragmentation and that participation in an AI regulatory sandbox established by a Member State, or by the European Data Protection Supervisor is mutually and uniformly recognised and carries the same legal effects across the Union;  
  
(h)   that participation in the AI regulatory sandbox is limited to a period that is appropriate to the complexity and scale of the project and that may be extended by the national competent authority;  
  
(i)   that AI regulatory sandboxes facilitate the development of tools and infrastructure for testing, benchmarking, assessing and explaining dimensions of AI systems relevant for regulatory learning, such as accuracy, robustness and cybersecurity, as well as measures to mitigate risks to fundamental rights and society at large.  
  
  
3.  Prospective providers in the AI regulatory sandboxes, in particular SMEs
and start-ups, shall be directed, where relevant, to pre-deployment services
such as guidance on the implementation of this Regulation, to other value-
adding services such as help with standardisation documents and certification,
testing and experimentation facilities, European Digital Innovation Hubs and
centres of excellence.

4.  Where national competent authorities consider authorising testing in real
world conditions supervised within the framework of an AI regulatory sandbox
to be established under this Article, they shall specifically agree the terms
and conditions of such testing and, in particular, the appropriate safeguards
with the participants, with a view to protecting fundamental rights, health
and safety. Where appropriate, they shall cooperate with other national
competent authorities with a view to ensuring consistent practices across the
Union.

Article 59

Further processing of personal data for developing certain AI systems in the
public interest in the AI regulatory sandbox

1.  In the AI regulatory sandbox, personal data lawfully collected for other
purposes may be processed solely for the purpose of developing, training and
testing certain AI systems in the sandbox when all of the following conditions
are met:

(a)   AI systems shall be developed for safeguarding substantial public interest by a public authority or another natural or legal person and in one or more of the following areas:

(i)   public safety and public health, including disease detection, diagnosis prevention, control and treatment and improvement of health care systems;  
  
(ii)   a high level of protection and improvement of the quality of the environment, protection of biodiversity, protection against pollution, green transition measures, climate change mitigation and adaptation measures;  
  
(iii)   energy sustainability;  
  
(iv)   safety and resilience of transport systems and mobility, critical infrastructure and networks;  
  
(v)   efficiency and quality of public administration and public services;  
  
(b)   the data processed are necessary for complying with one or more of the requirements referred to in Chapter III, Section 2 where those requirements cannot effectively be fulfilled by processing anonymised, synthetic or other non-personal data;  
  
(c)   there are effective monitoring mechanisms to identify if any high risks to the rights and freedoms of the data subjects, as referred to in Article 35 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and in Article 39 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725, may arise during the sandbox experimentation, as well as response mechanisms to promptly mitigate those risks and, where necessary, stop the processing;  
  
(d)   any personal data to be processed in the context of the sandbox are in a functionally separate, isolated and protected data processing environment under the control of the prospective provider and only authorised persons have access to those data;  
  
(e)   providers can further share the originally collected data only in accordance with Union data protection law; any personal data created in the sandbox cannot be shared outside the sandbox;  
  
(f)   any processing of personal data in the context of the sandbox neither leads to measures or decisions affecting the data subjects nor does it affect the application of their rights laid down in Union law on the protection of personal data;  
  
(g)   any personal data processed in the context of the sandbox are protected by means of appropriate technical and organisational measures and deleted once the participation in the sandbox has terminated or the personal data has reached the end of its retention period;  
  
(h)   the logs of the processing of personal data in the context of the sandbox are kept for the duration of the participation in the sandbox, unless provided otherwise by Union or national law;  
  
(i)   a complete and detailed description of the process and rationale behind the training, testing and validation of the AI system is kept together with the testing results as part of the technical documentation referred to in Annex IV;  
  
(j)   a short summary of the AI project developed in the sandbox, its objectives and expected results is published on the website of the competent authorities; this obligation shall not cover sensitive operational data in relation to the activities of law enforcement, border control, immigration or asylum authorities.  
  
  
2.  For the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection or
prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties,
including safeguarding against and preventing threats to public security,
under the control and responsibility of law enforcement authorities, the
processing of personal data in AI regulatory sandboxes shall be based on a
specific Union or national law and subject to the same cumulative conditions
as referred to in paragraph 1.

3.  Paragraph 1 is without prejudice to Union or national law which excludes
processing of personal data for other purposes than those explicitly mentioned
in that law, as well as to Union or national law laying down the basis for the
processing of personal data which is necessary for the purpose of developing,
testing or training of innovative AI systems or any other legal basis, in
compliance with Union law on the protection of personal data.

Article 60

Testing of high-risk AI systems in real world conditions outside AI regulatory
sandboxes

1.  Testing of high-risk AI systems in real world conditions outside AI
regulatory sandboxes may be conducted by providers or prospective providers of
high-risk AI systems listed in Annex III, in accordance with this Article and
the real-world testing plan referred to in this Article, without prejudice to
the prohibitions under Article 5.

The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, specify the detailed
elements of the real-world testing plan. Those implementing acts shall be
adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article
98(2).

This paragraph shall be without prejudice to Union or national law on the
testing in real world conditions of high-risk AI systems related to products
covered by Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex I.

2.  Providers or prospective providers may conduct testing of high-risk AI
systems referred to in Annex III in real world conditions at any time before
the placing on the market or the putting into service of the AI system on
their own or in partnership with one or more deployers or prospective
deployers.

3.  The testing of high-risk AI systems in real world conditions under this
Article shall be without prejudice to any ethical review that is required by
Union or national law.

4.  Providers or prospective providers may conduct the testing in real world
conditions only where all of the following conditions are met:

(a)   the provider or prospective provider has drawn up a real-world testing plan and submitted it to the market surveillance authority in the Member State where the testing in real world conditions is to be conducted;  
  
(b)   the market surveillance authority in the Member State where the testing in real world conditions is to be conducted has approved the testing in real world conditions and the real-world testing plan; where the market surveillance authority has not provided an answer within 30 days, the testing in real world conditions and the real-world testing plan shall be understood to have been approved; where national law does not provide for a tacit approval, the testing in real world conditions shall remain subject to an authorisation;  
  
(c)   the provider or prospective provider, with the exception of providers or prospective providers of high-risk AI systems referred to in points 1, 6 and 7 of Annex III in the areas of law enforcement, migration, asylum and border control management, and high-risk AI systems referred to in point 2 of Annex III has registered the testing in real world conditions in accordance with Article 71(4) with a Union-wide unique single identification number and with the information specified in Annex IX; the provider or prospective provider of high-risk AI systems referred to in points 1, 6 and 7 of Annex III in the areas of law enforcement, migration, asylum and border control management, has registered the testing in real-world conditions in the secure non-public section of the EU database according to Article 49(4), point (d), with a Union-wide unique single identification number and with the information specified therein; the provider or prospective provider of high-risk AI systems referred to in point 2 of Annex III has registered the testing in real-world conditions in accordance with Article 49(5);  
  
(d)   the provider or prospective provider conducting the testing in real world conditions is established in the Union or has appointed a legal representative who is established in the Union;  
  
(e)   data collected and processed for the purpose of the testing in real world conditions shall be transferred to third countries only provided that appropriate and applicable safeguards under Union law are implemented;  
  
(f)   the testing in real world conditions does not last longer than necessary to achieve its objectives and in any case not longer than six months, which may be extended for an additional period of six months, subject to prior notification by the provider or prospective provider to the market surveillance authority, accompanied by an explanation of the need for such an extension;  
  
(g)   the subjects of the testing in real world conditions who are persons belonging to vulnerable groups due to their age or disability, are appropriately protected;  
  
(h)   where a provider or prospective provider organises the testing in real world conditions in cooperation with one or more deployers or prospective deployers, the latter have been informed of all aspects of the testing that are relevant to their decision to participate, and given the relevant instructions for use of the AI system referred to in Article 13; the provider or prospective provider and the deployer or prospective deployer shall conclude an agreement specifying their roles and responsibilities with a view to ensuring compliance with the provisions for testing in real world conditions under this Regulation and under other applicable Union and national law;  
  
(i)   the subjects of the testing in real world conditions have given informed consent in accordance with Article 61, or in the case of law enforcement, where the seeking of informed consent would prevent the AI system from being tested, the testing itself and the outcome of the testing in the real world conditions shall not have any negative effect on the subjects, and their personal data shall be deleted after the test is performed;  
  
(j)   the testing in real world conditions is effectively overseen by the provider or prospective provider, as well as by deployers or prospective deployers through persons who are suitably qualified in the relevant field and have the necessary capacity, training and authority to perform their tasks;  
  
(k)   the predictions, recommendations or decisions of the AI system can be effectively reversed and disregarded.  
  
  
5.  Any subjects of the testing in real world conditions, or their legally
designated representative, as appropriate, may, without any resulting
detriment and without having to provide any justification, withdraw from the
testing at any time by revoking their informed consent and may request the
immediate and permanent deletion of their personal data. The withdrawal of the
informed consent shall not affect the activities already carried out.

6.  In accordance with Article 75, Member States shall confer on their market
surveillance authorities the powers of requiring providers and prospective
providers to provide information, of carrying out unannounced remote or on-
site inspections, and of performing checks on the conduct of the testing in
real world conditions and the related high-risk AI systems. Market
surveillance authorities shall use those powers to ensure the safe development
of testing in real world conditions.

7.  Any serious incident identified in the course of the testing in real world
conditions shall be reported to the national market surveillance authority in
accordance with Article 73. The provider or prospective provider shall adopt
immediate mitigation measures or, failing that, shall suspend the testing in
real world conditions until such mitigation takes place, or otherwise
terminate it. The provider or prospective provider shall establish a procedure
for the prompt recall of the AI system upon such termination of the testing in
real world conditions.

8.  Providers or prospective providers shall notify the national market
surveillance authority in the Member State where the testing in real world
conditions is to be conducted of the suspension or termination of the testing
in real world conditions and of the final outcomes.

9.  The provider or prospective provider shall be liable under applicable
Union and national liability law for any damage caused in the course of their
testing in real world conditions.

Article 61

Informed consent to participate in testing in real world conditions outside AI
regulatory sandboxes

1.  For the purpose of testing in real world conditions under Article 60,
freely-given informed consent shall be obtained from the subjects of testing
prior to their participation in such testing and after their having been duly
informed with concise, clear, relevant, and understandable information
regarding:

(a)   the nature and objectives of the testing in real world conditions and the possible inconvenience that may be linked to their participation;  
  
(b)   the conditions under which the testing in real world conditions is to be conducted, including the expected duration of the subject or subjects’ participation;  
  
(c)   their rights, and the guarantees regarding their participation, in particular their right to refuse to participate in, and the right to withdraw from, testing in real world conditions at any time without any resulting detriment and without having to provide any justification;  
  
(d)   the arrangements for requesting the reversal or the disregarding of the predictions, recommendations or decisions of the AI system;  
  
(e)   the Union-wide unique single identification number of the testing in real world conditions in accordance with Article 60(4) point (c), and the contact details of the provider or its legal representative from whom further information can be obtained.  
  
  
2.  The informed consent shall be dated and documented and a copy shall be
given to the subjects of testing or their legal representative.

Article 62

Measures for providers and deployers, in particular SMEs, including start-ups

1.  Member States shall undertake the following actions:

(a)   provide SMEs, including start-ups, having a registered office or a branch in the Union, with priority access to the AI regulatory sandboxes, to the extent that they fulfil the eligibility conditions and selection criteria; the priority access shall not preclude other SMEs, including start-ups, other than those referred to in this paragraph from access to the AI regulatory sandbox, provided that they also fulfil the eligibility conditions and selection criteria;  
  
(b)   organise specific awareness raising and training activities on the application of this Regulation tailored to the needs of SMEs including start-ups, deployers and, as appropriate, local public authorities;  
  
(c)   utilise existing dedicated channels and where appropriate, establish new ones for communication with SMEs including start-ups, deployers, other innovators and, as appropriate, local public authorities to provide advice and respond to queries about the implementation of this Regulation, including as regards participation in AI regulatory sandboxes;  
  
(d)   facilitate the participation of SMEs and other relevant stakeholders in the standardisation development process.  
  
  
2.  The specific interests and needs of the SME providers, including start-
ups, shall be taken into account when setting the fees for conformity
assessment under Article 43, reducing those fees proportionately to their
size, market size and other relevant indicators.

3.  The AI Office shall undertake the following actions:

(a)   provide standardised templates for areas covered by this Regulation, as specified by the Board in its request;  
  
(b)   develop and maintain a single information platform providing easy to use information in relation to this Regulation for all operators across the Union;  
  
(c)   organise appropriate communication campaigns to raise awareness about the obligations arising from this Regulation;  
  
(d)   evaluate and promote the convergence of best practices in public procurement procedures in relation to AI systems.  
  
  
Article 63

Derogations for specific operators

1.  Microenterprises within the meaning of Recommendation 2003/361/EC may
comply with certain elements of the quality management system required by
Article 17 of this Regulation in a simplified manner, provided that they do
not have partner enterprises or linked enterprises within the meaning of that
Recommendation. For that purpose, the Commission shall develop guidelines on
the elements of the quality management system which may be complied with in a
simplified manner considering the needs of microenterprises, without affecting
the level of protection or the need for compliance with the requirements in
respect of high-risk AI systems.

2.  Paragraph 1 of this Article shall not be interpreted as exempting those
operators from fulfilling any other requirements or obligations laid down in
this Regulation, including those established in Articles 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 72 and 73.

CHAPTER VII

GOVERNANCE

SECTION 1

Governance at Union level

Article 64

AI Office

1.  The Commission shall develop Union expertise and capabilities in the field
of AI through the AI Office.

2.  Member States shall facilitate the tasks entrusted to the AI Office, as
reflected in this Regulation.

Article 65

Establishment and structure of the European Artificial Intelligence Board

1.  A European Artificial Intelligence Board (the ‘Board’) is hereby
established.

2.  The Board shall be composed of one representative per Member State. The
European Data Protection Supervisor shall participate as observer. The AI
Office shall also attend the Board’s meetings, without taking part in the
votes. Other national and Union authorities, bodies or experts may be invited
to the meetings by the Board on a case by case basis, where the issues
discussed are of relevance for them.

3.  Each representative shall be designated by their Member State for a period
of three years, renewable once.

4.  Member States shall ensure that their representatives on the Board:

(a)   have the relevant competences and powers in their Member State so as to contribute actively to the achievement of the Board’s tasks referred to in Article 66;  
  
(b)   are designated as a single contact point vis-à-vis the Board and, where appropriate, taking into account Member States’ needs, as a single contact point for stakeholders;  
  
(c)   are empowered to facilitate consistency and coordination between national competent authorities in their Member State as regards the implementation of this Regulation, including through the collection of relevant data and information for the purpose of fulfilling their tasks on the Board.  
  
  
5.  The designated representatives of the Member States shall adopt the
Board’s rules of procedure by a two-thirds majority. The rules of procedure
shall, in particular, lay down procedures for the selection process, the
duration of the mandate of, and specifications of the tasks of, the Chair,
detailed arrangements for voting, and the organisation of the Board’s
activities and those of its sub-groups.

6.  The Board shall establish two standing sub-groups to provide a platform
for cooperation and exchange among market surveillance authorities and
notifying authorities about issues related to market surveillance and notified
bodies respectively.

The standing sub-group for market surveillance should act as the
administrative cooperation group (ADCO) for this Regulation within the meaning
of Article 30 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020.

The Board may establish other standing or temporary sub-groups as appropriate
for the purpose of examining specific issues. Where appropriate,
representatives of the advisory forum referred to in Article 67 may be invited
to such sub-groups or to specific meetings of those subgroups as observers.

7.  The Board shall be organised and operated so as to safeguard the
objectivity and impartiality of its activities.

8.  The Board shall be chaired by one of the representatives of the Member
States. The AI Office shall provide the secretariat for the Board, convene the
meetings upon request of the Chair, and prepare the agenda in accordance with
the tasks of the Board pursuant to this Regulation and its rules of procedure.

Article 66

Tasks of the Board

The Board shall advise and assist the Commission and the Member States in
order to facilitate the consistent and effective application of this
Regulation. To that end, the Board may in particular:

(a)   contribute to the coordination among national competent authorities responsible for the application of this Regulation and, in cooperation with and subject to the agreement of the market surveillance authorities concerned, support joint activities of market surveillance authorities referred to in Article 74(11);  
  
(b)   collect and share technical and regulatory expertise and best practices among Member States;  
  
(c)   provide advice on the implementation of this Regulation, in particular as regards the enforcement of rules on general-purpose AI models;  
  
(d)   contribute to the harmonisation of administrative practices in the Member States, including in relation to the derogation from the conformity assessment procedures referred to in Article 46, the functioning of AI regulatory sandboxes, and testing in real world conditions referred to in Articles 57, 59 and 60;  
  
(e)   at the request of the Commission or on its own initiative, issue recommendations and written opinions on any relevant matters related to the implementation of this Regulation and to its consistent and effective application, including:

(i)   on the development and application of codes of conduct and codes of practice pursuant to this Regulation, as well as of the Commission’s guidelines;  
  
(ii)   the evaluation and review of this Regulation pursuant to Article 112, including as regards the serious incident reports referred to in Article 73, and the functioning of the EU database referred to in Article 71, the preparation of the delegated or implementing acts, and as regards possible alignments of this Regulation with the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex I;  
  
(iii)   on technical specifications or existing standards regarding the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2;  
  
(iv)   on the use of harmonised standards or common specifications referred to in Articles 40 and 41;  
  
(v)   trends, such as European global competitiveness in AI, the uptake of AI in the Union, and the development of digital skills;  
  
(vi)   trends on the evolving typology of AI value chains, in particular on the resulting implications in terms of accountability;  
  
(vii)   on the potential need for amendment to Annex III in accordance with Article 7, and on the potential need for possible revision of Article 5 pursuant to Article 112, taking into account relevant available evidence and the latest developments in technology;  
  
(f)   support the Commission in promoting AI literacy, public awareness and understanding of the benefits, risks, safeguards and rights and obligations in relation to the use of AI systems;  
  
(g)   facilitate the development of common criteria and a shared understanding among market operators and competent authorities of the relevant concepts provided for in this Regulation, including by contributing to the development of benchmarks;  
  
(h)   cooperate, as appropriate, with other Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies, as well as relevant Union expert groups and networks, in particular in the fields of product safety, cybersecurity, competition, digital and media services, financial services, consumer protection, data and fundamental rights protection;  
  
(i)   contribute to effective cooperation with the competent authorities of third countries and with international organisations;  
  
(j)   assist national competent authorities and the Commission in developing the organisational and technical expertise required for the implementation of this Regulation, including by contributing to the assessment of training needs for staff of Member States involved in implementing this Regulation;  
  
(k)   assist the AI Office in supporting national competent authorities in the establishment and development of AI regulatory sandboxes, and facilitate cooperation and information-sharing among AI regulatory sandboxes;  
  
(l)   contribute to, and provide relevant advice on, the development of guidance documents;  
  
(m)   advise the Commission in relation to international matters on AI;  
  
(n)   provide opinions to the Commission on the qualified alerts regarding general-purpose AI models;  
  
(o)   receive opinions by the Member States on qualified alerts regarding general-purpose AI models, and on national experiences and practices on the monitoring and enforcement of AI systems, in particular systems integrating the general-purpose AI models.  
  
  
Article 67

Advisory forum

1.  An advisory forum shall be established to provide technical expertise and
advise the Board and the Commission, and to contribute to their tasks under
this Regulation.

2.  The membership of the advisory forum shall represent a balanced selection
of stakeholders, including industry, start-ups, SMEs, civil society and
academia. The membership of the advisory forum shall be balanced with regard
to commercial and non-commercial interests and, within the category of
commercial interests, with regard to SMEs and other undertakings.

3.  The Commission shall appoint the members of the advisory forum, in
accordance with the criteria set out in paragraph 2, from amongst stakeholders
with recognised expertise in the field of AI.

4.  The term of office of the members of the advisory forum shall be two
years, which may be extended by up to no more than four years.

5.  The Fundamental Rights Agency, ENISA, the European Committee for
Standardization (CEN), the European Committee for Electrotechnical
Standardization (CENELEC), and the European Telecommunications Standards
Institute (ETSI) shall be permanent members of the advisory forum.

6.  The advisory forum shall draw up its rules of procedure. It shall elect
two co-chairs from among its members, in accordance with criteria set out in
paragraph 2. The term of office of the co-chairs shall be two years, renewable
once.

7.  The advisory forum shall hold meetings at least twice a year. The advisory
forum may invite experts and other stakeholders to its meetings.

8.  The advisory forum may prepare opinions, recommendations and written
contributions at the request of the Board or the Commission.

9.  The advisory forum may establish standing or temporary sub-groups as
appropriate for the purpose of examining specific questions related to the
objectives of this Regulation.

10.  The advisory forum shall prepare an annual report on its activities. That
report shall be made publicly available.

Article 68

Scientific panel of independent experts

1.  The Commission shall, by means of an implementing act, make provisions on
the establishment of a scientific panel of independent experts (the
‘scientific panel’) intended to support the enforcement activities under this
Regulation. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the
examination procedure referred to in Article 98(2).

2.  The scientific panel shall consist of experts selected by the Commission
on the basis of up-to-date scientific or technical expertise in the field of
AI necessary for the tasks set out in paragraph 3, and shall be able to
demonstrate meeting all of the following conditions:

(a)   having particular expertise and competence and scientific or technical expertise in the field of AI;  
  
(b)   independence from any provider of AI systems or general-purpose AI models;  
  
(c)   an ability to carry out activities diligently, accurately and objectively.  
  
  
The Commission, in consultation with the Board, shall determine the number of
experts on the panel in accordance with the required needs and shall ensure
fair gender and geographical representation.

3.  The scientific panel shall advise and support the AI Office, in particular
with regard to the following tasks:

(a)   supporting the implementation and enforcement of this Regulation as regards general-purpose AI models and systems, in particular by:

(i)  alerting the AI Office of possible systemic risks at Union level of general-purpose AI models, in accordance with Article 90;  
  
(ii)   contributing to the development of tools and methodologies for evaluating capabilities of general-purpose AI models and systems, including through benchmarks;  
  
(iii)   providing advice on the classification of general-purpose AI models with systemic risk;  
  
(iv)   providing advice on the classification of various general-purpose AI models and systems;  
  
(v)   contributing to the development of tools and templates;  
  
(b)   supporting the work of market surveillance authorities, at their request;  
  
(c)   supporting cross-border market surveillance activities as referred to in Article 74(11), without prejudice to the powers of market surveillance authorities;  
  
(d)   supporting the AI Office in carrying out its duties in the context of the Union safeguard procedure pursuant to Article 81.  
  
  
4.  The experts on the scientific panel shall perform their tasks with
impartiality and objectivity, and shall ensure the confidentiality of
information and data obtained in carrying out their tasks and activities. They
shall neither seek nor take instructions from anyone when exercising their
tasks under paragraph 3. Each expert shall draw up a declaration of interests,
which shall be made publicly available. The AI Office shall establish systems
and procedures to actively manage and prevent potential conflicts of interest.

5.  The implementing act referred to in paragraph 1 shall include provisions
on the conditions, procedures and detailed arrangements for the scientific
panel and its members to issue alerts, and to request the assistance of the AI
Office for the performance of the tasks of the scientific panel.

Article 69

Access to the pool of experts by the Member States

1.  Member States may call upon experts of the scientific panel to support
their enforcement activities under this Regulation.

2.  The Member States may be required to pay fees for the advice and support
provided by the experts. The structure and the level of fees as well as the
scale and structure of recoverable costs shall be set out in the implementing
act referred to in Article 68(1), taking into account the objectives of the
adequate implementation of this Regulation, cost-effectiveness and the
necessity of ensuring effective access to experts for all Member States.

3.  The Commission shall facilitate timely access to the experts by the Member
States, as needed, and ensure that the combination of support activities
carried out by Union AI testing support pursuant to Article 84 and experts
pursuant to this Article is efficiently organised and provides the best
possible added value.

SECTION 2

National competent authorities

Article 70

Designation of national competent authorities and single points of contact

1.  Each Member State shall establish or designate as national competent
authorities at least one notifying authority and at least one market
surveillance authority for the purposes of this Regulation. Those national
competent authorities shall exercise their powers independently, impartially
and without bias so as to safeguard the objectivity of their activities and
tasks, and to ensure the application and implementation of this Regulation.
The members of those authorities shall refrain from any action incompatible
with their duties. Provided that those principles are observed, such
activities and tasks may be performed by one or more designated authorities,
in accordance with the organisational needs of the Member State.

2.  Member States shall communicate to the Commission the identity of the
notifying authorities and the market surveillance authorities and the tasks of
those authorities, as well as any subsequent changes thereto. Member States
shall make publicly available information on how competent authorities and
single points of contact can be contacted, through electronic communication
means by 2 August 2025. Member States shall designate a market surveillance
authority to act as the single point of contact for this Regulation, and shall
notify the Commission of the identity of the single point of contact. The
Commission shall make a list of the single points of contact publicly
available.

3.  Member States shall ensure that their national competent authorities are
provided with adequate technical, financial and human resources, and with
infrastructure to fulfil their tasks effectively under this Regulation. In
particular, the national competent authorities shall have a sufficient number
of personnel permanently available whose competences and expertise shall
include an in-depth understanding of AI technologies, data and data computing,
personal data protection, cybersecurity, fundamental rights, health and safety
risks and knowledge of existing standards and legal requirements. Member
States shall assess and, if necessary, update competence and resource
requirements referred to in this paragraph on an annual basis.

4.  National competent authorities shall take appropriate measures to ensure
an adequate level of cybersecurity.

5.  When performing their tasks, the national competent authorities shall act
in accordance with the confidentiality obligations set out in Article 78.

6.  By 2 August 2025, and once every two years thereafter, Member States shall
report to the Commission on the status of the financial and human resources of
the national competent authorities, with an assessment of their adequacy. The
Commission shall transmit that information to the Board for discussion and
possible recommendations.

7.  The Commission shall facilitate the exchange of experience between
national competent authorities.

8.  National competent authorities may provide guidance and advice on the
implementation of this Regulation, in particular to SMEs including start-ups,
taking into account the guidance and advice of the Board and the Commission,
as appropriate. Whenever national competent authorities intend to provide
guidance and advice with regard to an AI system in areas covered by other
Union law, the national competent authorities under that Union law shall be
consulted, as appropriate.

9.  Where Union institutions, bodies, offices or agencies fall within the
scope of this Regulation, the European Data Protection Supervisor shall act as
the competent authority for their supervision.

CHAPTER VIII

EU DATABASE FOR HIGH-RISK AI SYSTEMS

Article 71

EU database for high-risk AI systems listed in Annex III

1.  The Commission shall, in collaboration with the Member States, set up and
maintain an EU database containing information referred to in paragraphs 2 and
3 of this Article concerning high-risk AI systems referred to in Article 6(2)
which are registered in accordance with Articles 49 and 60 and AI systems that
are not considered as high-risk pursuant to Article 6(3) and which are
registered in accordance with Article 6(4) and Article 49. When setting the
functional specifications of such database, the Commission shall consult the
relevant experts, and when updating the functional specifications of such
database, the Commission shall consult the Board.

2.  The data listed in Sections A and B of Annex VIII shall be entered into
the EU database by the provider or, where applicable, by the authorised
representative.

3.  The data listed in Section C of Annex VIII shall be entered into the EU
database by the deployer who is, or who acts on behalf of, a public authority,
agency or body, in accordance with Article 49(3) and (4).

4.  With the exception of the section referred to in Article 49(4) and Article
60(4), point (c), the information contained in the EU database registered in
accordance with Article 49 shall be accessible and publicly available in a
user-friendly manner. The information should be easily navigable and machine-
readable. The information registered in accordance with Article 60 shall be
accessible only to market surveillance authorities and the Commission, unless
the prospective provider or provider has given consent for also making the
information accessible the public.

5.  The EU database shall contain personal data only in so far as necessary
for collecting and processing information in accordance with this Regulation.
That information shall include the names and contact details of natural
persons who are responsible for registering the system and have the legal
authority to represent the provider or the deployer, as applicable.

6.  The Commission shall be the controller of the EU database. It shall make
available to providers, prospective providers and deployers adequate technical
and administrative support. The EU database shall comply with the applicable
accessibility requirements.

CHAPTER IX

POST-MARKET MONITORING, INFORMATION SHARING AND MARKET SURVEILLANCE

SECTION 1

Post-market monitoring

Article 72

Post-market monitoring by providers and post-market monitoring plan for high-
risk AI systems

1.  Providers shall establish and document a post-market monitoring system in
a manner that is proportionate to the nature of the AI technologies and the
risks of the high-risk AI system.

2.  The post-market monitoring system shall actively and systematically
collect, document and analyse relevant data which may be provided by deployers
or which may be collected through other sources on the performance of high-
risk AI systems throughout their lifetime, and which allow the provider to
evaluate the continuous compliance of AI systems with the requirements set out
in Chapter III, Section 2. Where relevant, post-market monitoring shall
include an analysis of the interaction with other AI systems. This obligation
shall not cover sensitive operational data of deployers which are law-
enforcement authorities.

3.  The post-market monitoring system shall be based on a post-market
monitoring plan. The post-market monitoring plan shall be part of the
technical documentation referred to in Annex IV. The Commission shall adopt an
implementing act laying down detailed provisions establishing a template for
the post-market monitoring plan and the list of elements to be included in the
plan by 2 February 2026. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance
with the examination procedure referred to in Article 98(2).

4.  For high-risk AI systems covered by the Union harmonisation legislation
listed in Section A of Annex I, where a post-market monitoring system and plan
are already established under that legislation, in order to ensure
consistency, avoid duplications and minimise additional burdens, providers
shall have a choice of integrating, as appropriate, the necessary elements
described in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 using the template referred in paragraph 3
into systems and plans already existing under that legislation, provided that
it achieves an equivalent level of protection.

The first subparagraph of this paragraph shall also apply to high-risk AI
systems referred to in point 5 of Annex III placed on the market or put into
service by financial institutions that are subject to requirements under Union
financial services law regarding their internal governance, arrangements or
processes.

SECTION 2

Sharing of information on serious incidents

Article 73

Reporting of serious incidents

1.  Providers of high-risk AI systems placed on the Union market shall report
any serious incident to the market surveillance authorities of the Member
States where that incident occurred.

2.  The report referred to in paragraph 1 shall be made immediately after the
provider has established a causal link between the AI system and the serious
incident or the reasonable likelihood of such a link, and, in any event, not
later than 15 days after the provider or, where applicable, the deployer,
becomes aware of the serious incident.

The period for the reporting referred to in the first subparagraph shall take
account of the severity of the serious incident.

3.  Notwithstanding paragraph 2 of this Article, in the event of a widespread
infringement or a serious incident as defined in Article 3, point (49)(b), the
report referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be provided
immediately, and not later than two days after the provider or, where
applicable, the deployer becomes aware of that incident.

4.  Notwithstanding paragraph 2, in the event of the death of a person, the
report shall be provided immediately after the provider or the deployer has
established, or as soon as it suspects, a causal relationship between the
high-risk AI system and the serious incident, but not later than 10 days after
the date on which the provider or, where applicable, the deployer becomes
aware of the serious incident.

5.  Where necessary to ensure timely reporting, the provider or, where
applicable, the deployer, may submit an initial report that is incomplete,
followed by a complete report.

6.  Following the reporting of a serious incident pursuant to paragraph 1, the
provider shall, without delay, perform the necessary investigations in
relation to the serious incident and the AI system concerned. This shall
include a risk assessment of the incident, and corrective action.

The provider shall cooperate with the competent authorities, and where
relevant with the notified body concerned, during the investigations referred
to in the first subparagraph, and shall not perform any investigation which
involves altering the AI system concerned in a way which may affect any
subsequent evaluation of the causes of the incident, prior to informing the
competent authorities of such action.

7.  Upon receiving a notification related to a serious incident referred to in
Article 3, point (49)(c), the relevant market surveillance authority shall
inform the national public authorities or bodies referred to in Article 77(1).
The Commission shall develop dedicated guidance to facilitate compliance with
the obligations set out in paragraph 1 of this Article. That guidance shall be
issued by 2 August 2025, and shall be assessed regularly.

8.  The market surveillance authority shall take appropriate measures, as
provided for in Article 19 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, within seven days
from the date it received the notification referred to in paragraph 1 of this
Article, and shall follow the notification procedures as provided in that
Regulation.

9.  For high-risk AI systems referred to in Annex III that are placed on the
market or put into service by providers that are subject to Union legislative
instruments laying down reporting obligations equivalent to those set out in
this Regulation, the notification of serious incidents shall be limited to
those referred to in Article 3, point (49)(c).

10.  For high-risk AI systems which are safety components of devices, or are
themselves devices, covered by Regulations (EU) 2017/745 and (EU) 2017/746,
the notification of serious incidents shall be limited to those referred to in
Article 3, point (49)(c) of this Regulation, and shall be made to the national
competent authority chosen for that purpose by the Member States where the
incident occurred.

11.  National competent authorities shall immediately notify the Commission of
any serious incident, whether or not they have taken action on it, in
accordance with Article 20 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020.

SECTION 3

Enforcement

Article 74

Market surveillance and control of AI systems in the Union market

1.  Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 shall apply to AI systems covered by this
Regulation. For the purposes of the effective enforcement of this Regulation:

(a)   any reference to an economic operator under Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 shall be understood as including all operators identified in Article 2(1) of this Regulation;  
  
(b)   any reference to a product under Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 shall be understood as including all AI systems falling within the scope of this Regulation.  
  
  
2.  As part of their reporting obligations under Article 34(4) of Regulation
(EU) 2019/1020, the market surveillance authorities shall report annually to
the Commission and relevant national competition authorities any information
identified in the course of market surveillance activities that may be of
potential interest for the application of Union law on competition rules. They
shall also annually report to the Commission about the use of prohibited
practices that occurred during that year and about the measures taken.

3.  For high-risk AI systems related to products covered by the Union
harmonisation legislation listed in Section A of Annex I, the market
surveillance authority for the purposes of this Regulation shall be the
authority responsible for market surveillance activities designated under
those legal acts.

By derogation from the first subparagraph, and in appropriate circumstances,
Member States may designate another relevant authority to act as a market
surveillance authority, provided they ensure coordination with the relevant
sectoral market surveillance authorities responsible for the enforcement of
the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex I.

4.  The procedures referred to in Articles 79 to 83 of this Regulation shall
not apply to AI systems related to products covered by the Union harmonisation
legislation listed in section A of Annex I, where such legal acts already
provide for procedures ensuring an equivalent level of protection and having
the same objective. In such cases, the relevant sectoral procedures shall
apply instead.

5.  Without prejudice to the powers of market surveillance authorities under
Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, for the purpose of ensuring the
effective enforcement of this Regulation, market surveillance authorities may
exercise the powers referred to in Article 14(4), points (d) and (j), of that
Regulation remotely, as appropriate.

6.  For high-risk AI systems placed on the market, put into service, or used
by financial institutions regulated by Union financial services law, the
market surveillance authority for the purposes of this Regulation shall be the
relevant national authority responsible for the financial supervision of those
institutions under that legislation in so far as the placing on the market,
putting into service, or the use of the AI system is in direct connection with
the provision of those financial services.

7.  By way of derogation from paragraph 6, in appropriate circumstances, and
provided that coordination is ensured, another relevant authority may be
identified by the Member State as market surveillance authority for the
purposes of this Regulation.

National market surveillance authorities supervising regulated credit
institutions regulated under Directive 2013/36/EU, which are participating in
the Single Supervisory Mechanism established by Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013,
should report, without delay, to the European Central Bank any information
identified in the course of their market surveillance activities that may be
of potential interest for the prudential supervisory tasks of the European
Central Bank specified in that Regulation.

8.  For high-risk AI systems listed in point 1 of Annex III to this
Regulation, in so far as the systems are used for law enforcement purposes,
border management and justice and democracy, and for high-risk AI systems
listed in points 6, 7 and 8 of Annex III to this Regulation, Member States
shall designate as market surveillance authorities for the purposes of this
Regulation either the competent data protection supervisory authorities under
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 or Directive (EU) 2016/680, or any other authority
designated pursuant to the same conditions laid down in Articles 41 to 44 of
Directive (EU) 2016/680. Market surveillance activities shall in no way affect
the independence of judicial authorities, or otherwise interfere with their
activities when acting in their judicial capacity.

9.  Where Union institutions, bodies, offices or agencies fall within the
scope of this Regulation, the European Data Protection Supervisor shall act as
their market surveillance authority, except in relation to the Court of
Justice of the European Union acting in its judicial capacity.

10.  Member States shall facilitate coordination between market surveillance
authorities designated under this Regulation and other relevant national
authorities or bodies which supervise the application of Union harmonisation
legislation listed in Annex I, or in other Union law, that might be relevant
for the high-risk AI systems referred to in Annex III.

11.  Market surveillance authorities and the Commission shall be able to
propose joint activities, including joint investigations, to be conducted by
either market surveillance authorities or market surveillance authorities
jointly with the Commission, that have the aim of promoting compliance,
identifying non-compliance, raising awareness or providing guidance in
relation to this Regulation with respect to specific categories of high-risk
AI systems that are found to present a serious risk across two or more Member
States in accordance with Article 9 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020. The AI
Office shall provide coordination support for joint investigations.

12.  Without prejudice to the powers provided for under Regulation (EU)
2019/1020, and where relevant and limited to what is necessary to fulfil their
tasks, the market surveillance authorities shall be granted full access by
providers to the documentation as well as the training, validation and testing
data sets used for the development of high-risk AI systems, including, where
appropriate and subject to security safeguards, through application
programming interfaces (API) or other relevant technical means and tools
enabling remote access.

13.  Market surveillance authorities shall be granted access to the source
code of the high-risk AI system upon a reasoned request and only when both of
the following conditions are fulfilled:

(a)   access to source code is necessary to assess the conformity of a high-risk AI system with the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2; and  
  
(b)   testing or auditing procedures and verifications based on the data and documentation provided by the provider have been exhausted or proved insufficient.  
  
  
14.  Any information or documentation obtained by market surveillance
authorities shall be treated in accordance with the confidentiality
obligations set out in Article 78.

Article 75

Mutual assistance, market surveillance and control of general-purpose AI
systems

1.  Where an AI system is based on a general-purpose AI model, and the model
and the system are developed by the same provider, the AI Office shall have
powers to monitor and supervise compliance of that AI system with obligations
under this Regulation. To carry out its monitoring and supervision tasks, the
AI Office shall have all the powers of a market surveillance authority
provided for in this Section and Regulation (EU) 2019/1020.

2.  Where the relevant market surveillance authorities have sufficient reason
to consider general-purpose AI systems that can be used directly by deployers
for at least one purpose that is classified as high-risk pursuant to this
Regulation to be non-compliant with the requirements laid down in this
Regulation, they shall cooperate with the AI Office to carry out compliance
evaluations, and shall inform the Board and other market surveillance
authorities accordingly.

3.  Where a market surveillance authority is unable to conclude its
investigation of the high-risk AI system because of its inability to access
certain information related to the general-purpose AI model despite having
made all appropriate efforts to obtain that information, it may submit a
reasoned request to the AI Office, by which access to that information shall
be enforced. In that case, the AI Office shall supply to the applicant
authority without delay, and in any event within 30 days, any information that
the AI Office considers to be relevant in order to establish whether a high-
risk AI system is non-compliant. Market surveillance authorities shall
safeguard the confidentiality of the information that they obtain in
accordance with Article 78 of this Regulation. The procedure provided for in
Chapter VI of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 shall apply mutatis mutandis.

Article 76

Supervision of testing in real world conditions by market surveillance
authorities

1.  Market surveillance authorities shall have competences and powers to
ensure that testing in real world conditions is in accordance with this
Regulation.

2.  Where testing in real world conditions is conducted for AI systems that
are supervised within an AI regulatory sandbox under Article 58, the market
surveillance authorities shall verify the compliance with Article 60 as part
of their supervisory role for the AI regulatory sandbox. Those authorities
may, as appropriate, allow the testing in real world conditions to be
conducted by the provider or prospective provider, in derogation from the
conditions set out in Article 60(4), points (f) and (g).

3.  Where a market surveillance authority has been informed by the prospective
provider, the provider or any third party of a serious incident or has other
grounds for considering that the conditions set out in Articles 60 and 61 are
not met, it may take either of the following decisions on its territory, as
appropriate:

(a)   to suspend or terminate the testing in real world conditions;  
  
(b)   to require the provider or prospective provider and the deployer or prospective deployer to modify any aspect of the testing in real world conditions.  
  
  
4.  Where a market surveillance authority has taken a decision referred to in
paragraph 3 of this Article, or has issued an objection within the meaning of
Article 60(4), point (b), the decision or the objection shall indicate the
grounds therefor and how the provider or prospective provider can challenge
the decision or objection.

5.  Where applicable, where a market surveillance authority has taken a
decision referred to in paragraph 3, it shall communicate the grounds therefor
to the market surveillance authorities of other Member States in which the AI
system has been tested in accordance with the testing plan.

Article 77

Powers of authorities protecting fundamental rights

1.  National public authorities or bodies which supervise or enforce the
respect of obligations under Union law protecting fundamental rights,
including the right to non-discrimination, in relation to the use of high-risk
AI systems referred to in Annex III shall have the power to request and access
any documentation created or maintained under this Regulation in accessible
language and format when access to that documentation is necessary for
effectively fulfilling their mandates within the limits of their jurisdiction.
The relevant public authority or body shall inform the market surveillance
authority of the Member State concerned of any such request.

2.  By 2 November 2024, each Member State shall identify the public
authorities or bodies referred to in paragraph 1 and make a list of them
publicly available. Member States shall notify the list to the Commission and
to the other Member States, and shall keep the list up to date.

3.  Where the documentation referred to in paragraph 1 is insufficient to
ascertain whether an infringement of obligations under Union law protecting
fundamental rights has occurred, the public authority or body referred to in
paragraph 1 may make a reasoned request to the market surveillance authority,
to organise testing of the high-risk AI system through technical means. The
market surveillance authority shall organise the testing with the close
involvement of the requesting public authority or body within a reasonable
time following the request.

4.  Any information or documentation obtained by the national public
authorities or bodies referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article pursuant to
this Article shall be treated in accordance with the confidentiality
obligations set out in Article 78.

Article 78

Confidentiality

1.  The Commission, market surveillance authorities and notified bodies and
any other natural or legal person involved in the application of this
Regulation shall, in accordance with Union or national law, respect the
confidentiality of information and data obtained in carrying out their tasks
and activities in such a manner as to protect, in particular:

(a)   the intellectual property rights and confidential business information or trade secrets of a natural or legal person, including source code, except in the cases referred to in Article 5 of Directive (EU) 2016/943 of the European Parliament and of the Council (57);  
  
(b)   the effective implementation of this Regulation, in particular for the purposes of inspections, investigations or audits;  
  
(c)   public and national security interests;  
  
(d)   the conduct of criminal or administrative proceedings;  
  
(e)   information classified pursuant to Union or national law.  
  
  
2.  The authorities involved in the application of this Regulation pursuant to
paragraph 1 shall request only data that is strictly necessary for the
assessment of the risk posed by AI systems and for the exercise of their
powers in accordance with this Regulation and with Regulation (EU) 2019/1020.
They shall put in place adequate and effective cybersecurity measures to
protect the security and confidentiality of the information and data obtained,
and shall delete the data collected as soon as it is no longer needed for the
purpose for which it was obtained, in accordance with applicable Union or
national law.

3.  Without prejudice to paragraphs 1 and 2, information exchanged on a
confidential basis between the national competent authorities or between
national competent authorities and the Commission shall not be disclosed
without prior consultation of the originating national competent authority and
the deployer when high-risk AI systems referred to in point 1, 6 or 7 of Annex
III are used by law enforcement, border control, immigration or asylum
authorities and when such disclosure would jeopardise public and national
security interests. This exchange of information shall not cover sensitive
operational data in relation to the activities of law enforcement, border
control, immigration or asylum authorities.

When the law enforcement, immigration or asylum authorities are providers of
high-risk AI systems referred to in point 1, 6 or 7 of Annex III, the
technical documentation referred to in Annex IV shall remain within the
premises of those authorities. Those authorities shall ensure that the market
surveillance authorities referred to in Article 74(8) and (9), as applicable,
can, upon request, immediately access the documentation or obtain a copy
thereof. Only staff of the market surveillance authority holding the
appropriate level of security clearance shall be allowed to access that
documentation or any copy thereof.

4.  Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall not affect the rights or obligations of the
Commission, Member States and their relevant authorities, as well as those of
notified bodies, with regard to the exchange of information and the
dissemination of warnings, including in the context of cross-border
cooperation, nor shall they affect the obligations of the parties concerned to
provide information under criminal law of the Member States.

5.  The Commission and Member States may exchange, where necessary and in
accordance with relevant provisions of international and trade agreements,
confidential information with regulatory authorities of third countries with
which they have concluded bilateral or multilateral confidentiality
arrangements guaranteeing an adequate level of confidentiality.

Article 79

Procedure at national level for dealing with AI systems presenting a risk

1.  AI systems presenting a risk shall be understood as a ‘product presenting
a risk’ as defined in Article 3, point 19 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, in so
far as they present risks to the health or safety, or to fundamental rights,
of persons.

2.  Where the market surveillance authority of a Member State has sufficient
reason to consider an AI system to present a risk as referred to in paragraph
1 of this Article, it shall carry out an evaluation of the AI system concerned
in respect of its compliance with all the requirements and obligations laid
down in this Regulation. Particular attention shall be given to AI systems
presenting a risk to vulnerable groups. Where risks to fundamental rights are
identified, the market surveillance authority shall also inform and fully
cooperate with the relevant national public authorities or bodies referred to
in Article 77(1). The relevant operators shall cooperate as necessary with the
market surveillance authority and with the other national public authorities
or bodies referred to in Article 77(1).

Where, in the course of that evaluation, the market surveillance authority or,
where applicable the market surveillance authority in cooperation with the
national public authority referred to in Article 77(1), finds that the AI
system does not comply with the requirements and obligations laid down in this
Regulation, it shall without undue delay require the relevant operator to take
all appropriate corrective actions to bring the AI system into compliance, to
withdraw the AI system from the market, or to recall it within a period the
market surveillance authority may prescribe, and in any event within the
shorter of 15 working days, or as provided for in the relevant Union
harmonisation legislation.

The market surveillance authority shall inform the relevant notified body
accordingly. Article 18 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 shall apply to the
measures referred to in the second subparagraph of this paragraph.

3.  Where the market surveillance authority considers that the non-compliance
is not restricted to its national territory, it shall inform the Commission
and the other Member States without undue delay of the results of the
evaluation and of the actions which it has required the operator to take.

4.  The operator shall ensure that all appropriate corrective action is taken
in respect of all the AI systems concerned that it has made available on the
Union market.

5.  Where the operator of an AI system does not take adequate corrective
action within the period referred to in paragraph 2, the market surveillance
authority shall take all appropriate provisional measures to prohibit or
restrict the AI system’s being made available on its national market or put
into service, to withdraw the product or the standalone AI system from that
market or to recall it. That authority shall without undue delay notify the
Commission and the other Member States of those measures.

6.  The notification referred to in paragraph 5 shall include all available
details, in particular the information necessary for the identification of the
non-compliant AI system, the origin of the AI system and the supply chain, the
nature of the non-compliance alleged and the risk involved, the nature and
duration of the national measures taken and the arguments put forward by the
relevant operator. In particular, the market surveillance authorities shall
indicate whether the non-compliance is due to one or more of the following:

(a)   non-compliance with the prohibition of the AI practices referred to in Article 5;  
  
(b)   a failure of a high-risk AI system to meet requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2;  
  
(c)   shortcomings in the harmonised standards or common specifications referred to in Articles 40 and 41 conferring a presumption of conformity;  
  
(d)   non-compliance with Article 50.  
  
  
7.  The market surveillance authorities other than the market surveillance
authority of the Member State initiating the procedure shall, without undue
delay, inform the Commission and the other Member States of any measures
adopted and of any additional information at their disposal relating to the
non-compliance of the AI system concerned, and, in the event of disagreement
with the notified national measure, of their objections.

8.  Where, within three months of receipt of the notification referred to in
paragraph 5 of this Article, no objection has been raised by either a market
surveillance authority of a Member State or by the Commission in respect of a
provisional measure taken by a market surveillance authority of another Member
State, that measure shall be deemed justified. This shall be without prejudice
to the procedural rights of the concerned operator in accordance with Article
18 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020. The three-month period referred to in this
paragraph shall be reduced to 30 days in the event of non-compliance with the
prohibition of the AI practices referred to in Article 5 of this Regulation.

9.  The market surveillance authorities shall ensure that appropriate
restrictive measures are taken in respect of the product or the AI system
concerned, such as withdrawal of the product or the AI system from their
market, without undue delay.

Article 80

Procedure for dealing with AI systems classified by the provider as non-high-
risk in application of Annex III

1.  Where a market surveillance authority has sufficient reason to consider
that an AI system classified by the provider as non-high-risk pursuant to
Article 6(3) is indeed high-risk, the market surveillance authority shall
carry out an evaluation of the AI system concerned in respect of its
classification as a high-risk AI system based on the conditions set out in
Article 6(3) and the Commission guidelines.

2.  Where, in the course of that evaluation, the market surveillance authority
finds that the AI system concerned is high-risk, it shall without undue delay
require the relevant provider to take all necessary actions to bring the AI
system into compliance with the requirements and obligations laid down in this
Regulation, as well as take appropriate corrective action within a period the
market surveillance authority may prescribe.

3.  Where the market surveillance authority considers that the use of the AI
system concerned is not restricted to its national territory, it shall inform
the Commission and the other Member States without undue delay of the results
of the evaluation and of the actions which it has required the provider to
take.

4.  The provider shall ensure that all necessary action is taken to bring the
AI system into compliance with the requirements and obligations laid down in
this Regulation. Where the provider of an AI system concerned does not bring
the AI system into compliance with those requirements and obligations within
the period referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, the provider shall be
subject to fines in accordance with Article 99.

5.  The provider shall ensure that all appropriate corrective action is taken
in respect of all the AI systems concerned that it has made available on the
Union market.

6.  Where the provider of the AI system concerned does not take adequate
corrective action within the period referred to in paragraph 2 of this
Article, Article 79(5) to (9) shall apply.

7.  Where, in the course of the evaluation pursuant to paragraph 1 of this
Article, the market surveillance authority establishes that the AI system was
misclassified by the provider as non-high-risk in order to circumvent the
application of requirements in Chapter III, Section 2, the provider shall be
subject to fines in accordance with Article 99.

8.  In exercising their power to monitor the application of this Article, and
in accordance with Article 11 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, market
surveillance authorities may perform appropriate checks, taking into account
in particular information stored in the EU database referred to in Article 71
of this Regulation.

Article 81

Union safeguard procedure

1.  Where, within three months of receipt of the notification referred to in
Article 79(5), or within 30 days in the case of non-compliance with the
prohibition of the AI practices referred to in Article 5, objections are
raised by the market surveillance authority of a Member State to a measure
taken by another market surveillance authority, or where the Commission
considers the measure to be contrary to Union law, the Commission shall
without undue delay enter into consultation with the market surveillance
authority of the relevant Member State and the operator or operators, and
shall evaluate the national measure. On the basis of the results of that
evaluation, the Commission shall, within six months, or within 60 days in the
case of non-compliance with the prohibition of the AI practices referred to in
Article 5, starting from the notification referred to in Article 79(5), decide
whether the national measure is justified and shall notify its decision to the
market surveillance authority of the Member State concerned. The Commission
shall also inform all other market surveillance authorities of its decision.

2.  Where the Commission considers the measure taken by the relevant Member
State to be justified, all Member States shall ensure that they take
appropriate restrictive measures in respect of the AI system concerned, such
as requiring the withdrawal of the AI system from their market without undue
delay, and shall inform the Commission accordingly. Where the Commission
considers the national measure to be unjustified, the Member State concerned
shall withdraw the measure and shall inform the Commission accordingly.

3.  Where the national measure is considered justified and the non-compliance
of the AI system is attributed to shortcomings in the harmonised standards or
common specifications referred to in Articles 40 and 41 of this Regulation,
the Commission shall apply the procedure provided for in Article 11 of
Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012.

Article 82

Compliant AI systems which present a risk

1.  Where, having performed an evaluation under Article 79, after consulting
the relevant national public authority referred to in Article 77(1), the
market surveillance authority of a Member State finds that although a high-
risk AI system complies with this Regulation, it nevertheless presents a risk
to the health or safety of persons, to fundamental rights, or to other aspects
of public interest protection, it shall require the relevant operator to take
all appropriate measures to ensure that the AI system concerned, when placed
on the market or put into service, no longer presents that risk without undue
delay, within a period it may prescribe.

2.  The provider or other relevant operator shall ensure that corrective
action is taken in respect of all the AI systems concerned that it has made
available on the Union market within the timeline prescribed by the market
surveillance authority of the Member State referred to in paragraph 1.

3.  The Member States shall immediately inform the Commission and the other
Member States of a finding under paragraph 1. That information shall include
all available details, in particular the data necessary for the identification
of the AI system concerned, the origin and the supply chain of the AI system,
the nature of the risk involved and the nature and duration of the national
measures taken.

4.  The Commission shall without undue delay enter into consultation with the
Member States concerned and the relevant operators, and shall evaluate the
national measures taken. On the basis of the results of that evaluation, the
Commission shall decide whether the measure is justified and, where necessary,
propose other appropriate measures.

5.  The Commission shall immediately communicate its decision to the Member
States concerned and to the relevant operators. It shall also inform the other
Member States.

Article 83

Formal non-compliance

1.  Where the market surveillance authority of a Member State makes one of the
following findings, it shall require the relevant provider to put an end to
the non-compliance concerned, within a period it may prescribe:

(a)   the CE marking has been affixed in violation of Article 48;  
  
(b)   the CE marking has not been affixed;  
  
(c)   the EU declaration of conformity referred to in Article 47 has not been drawn up;  
  
(d)   the EU declaration of conformity referred to in Article 47 has not been drawn up correctly;  
  
(e)   the registration in the EU database referred to in Article 71 has not been carried out;  
  
(f)   where applicable, no authorised representative has been appointed;  
  
(g)   technical documentation is not available.  
  
  
2.  Where the non-compliance referred to in paragraph 1 persists, the market
surveillance authority of the Member State concerned shall take appropriate
and proportionate measures to restrict or prohibit the high-risk AI system
being made available on the market or to ensure that it is recalled or
withdrawn from the market without delay.

Article 84

Union AI testing support structures

1.  The Commission shall designate one or more Union AI testing support
structures to perform the tasks listed under Article 21(6) of Regulation (EU)
2019/1020 in the area of AI.

2.  Without prejudice to the tasks referred to in paragraph 1, Union AI
testing support structures shall also provide independent technical or
scientific advice at the request of the Board, the Commission, or of market
surveillance authorities.

SECTION 4

Remedies

Article 85

Right to lodge a complaint with a market surveillance authority

Without prejudice to other administrative or judicial remedies, any natural or
legal person having grounds to consider that there has been an infringement of
the provisions of this Regulation may submit complaints to the relevant market
surveillance authority.

In accordance with Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, such complaints shall be taken
into account for the purpose of conducting market surveillance activities, and
shall be handled in line with the dedicated procedures established therefor by
the market surveillance authorities.

Article 86

Right to explanation of individual decision-making

1.  Any affected person subject to a decision which is taken by the deployer
on the basis of the output from a high-risk AI system listed in Annex III,
with the exception of systems listed under point 2 thereof, and which produces
legal effects or similarly significantly affects that person in a way that
they consider to have an adverse impact on their health, safety or fundamental
rights shall have the right to obtain from the deployer clear and meaningful
explanations of the role of the AI system in the decision-making procedure and
the main elements of the decision taken.

2.  Paragraph 1 shall not apply to the use of AI systems for which exceptions
from, or restrictions to, the obligation under that paragraph follow from
Union or national law in compliance with Union law.

3.  This Article shall apply only to the extent that the right referred to in
paragraph 1 is not otherwise provided for under Union law.

Article 87

Reporting of infringements and protection of reporting persons

Directive (EU) 2019/1937 shall apply to the reporting of infringements of this
Regulation and the protection of persons reporting such infringements.

SECTION 5

Supervision, investigation, enforcement and monitoring in respect of providers
of general-purpose AI models

Article 88

Enforcement of the obligations of providers of general-purpose AI models

1.  The Commission shall have exclusive powers to supervise and enforce
Chapter V, taking into account the procedural guarantees under Article 94. The
Commission shall entrust the implementation of these tasks to the AI Office,
without prejudice to the powers of organisation of the Commission and the
division of competences between Member States and the Union based on the
Treaties.

2.  Without prejudice to Article 75(3), market surveillance authorities may
request the Commission to exercise the powers laid down in this Section, where
that is necessary and proportionate to assist with the fulfilment of their
tasks under this Regulation.

Article 89

Monitoring actions

1.  For the purpose of carrying out the tasks assigned to it under this
Section, the AI Office may take the necessary actions to monitor the effective
implementation and compliance with this Regulation by providers of general-
purpose AI models, including their adherence to approved codes of practice.

2.  Downstream providers shall have the right to lodge a complaint alleging an
infringement of this Regulation. A complaint shall be duly reasoned and
indicate at least:

(a)   the point of contact of the provider of the general-purpose AI model concerned;  
  
(b)   a description of the relevant facts, the provisions of this Regulation concerned, and the reason why the downstream provider considers that the provider of the general-purpose AI model concerned infringed this Regulation;  
  
(c)   any other information that the downstream provider that sent the request considers relevant, including, where appropriate, information gathered on its own initiative.  
  
  
Article 90

Alerts of systemic risks by the scientific panel

1.  The scientific panel may provide a qualified alert to the AI Office where
it has reason to suspect that:

(a)   a general-purpose AI model poses concrete identifiable risk at Union level; or  
  
(b)   a general-purpose AI model meets the conditions referred to in Article 51.  
  
  
2.  Upon such qualified alert, the Commission, through the AI Office and after
having informed the Board, may exercise the powers laid down in this Section
for the purpose of assessing the matter. The AI Office shall inform the Board
of any measure according to Articles 91 to 94.

3.  A qualified alert shall be duly reasoned and indicate at least:

(a)   the point of contact of the provider of the general-purpose AI model with systemic risk concerned;  
  
(b)   a description of the relevant facts and the reasons for the alert by the scientific panel;  
  
(c)   any other information that the scientific panel considers to be relevant, including, where appropriate, information gathered on its own initiative.  
  
  
Article 91

Power to request documentation and information

1.  The Commission may request the provider of the general-purpose AI model
concerned to provide the documentation drawn up by the provider in accordance
with Articles 53 and 55, or any additional information that is necessary for
the purpose of assessing compliance of the provider with this Regulation.

2.  Before sending the request for information, the AI Office may initiate a
structured dialogue with the provider of the general-purpose AI model.

3.  Upon a duly substantiated request from the scientific panel, the
Commission may issue a request for information to a provider of a general-
purpose AI model, where the access to information is necessary and
proportionate for the fulfilment of the tasks of the scientific panel under
Article 68(2).

4.  The request for information shall state the legal basis and the purpose of
the request, specify what information is required, set a period within which
the information is to be provided, and indicate the fines provided for in
Article 101 for supplying incorrect, incomplete or misleading information.

5.  The provider of the general-purpose AI model concerned, or its
representative shall supply the information requested. In the case of legal
persons, companies or firms, or where the provider has no legal personality,
the persons authorised to represent them by law or by their statutes, shall
supply the information requested on behalf of the provider of the general-
purpose AI model concerned. Lawyers duly authorised to act may supply
information on behalf of their clients. The clients shall nevertheless remain
fully responsible if the information supplied is incomplete, incorrect or
misleading.

Article 92

Power to conduct evaluations

1.  The AI Office, after consulting the Board, may conduct evaluations of the
general-purpose AI model concerned:

(a)   to assess compliance of the provider with obligations under this Regulation, where the information gathered pursuant to Article 91 is insufficient; or  
  
(b)   to investigate systemic risks at Union level of general-purpose AI models with systemic risk, in particular following a qualified alert from the scientific panel in accordance with Article 90(1), point (a).  
  
  
2.  The Commission may decide to appoint independent experts to carry out
evaluations on its behalf, including from the scientific panel established
pursuant to Article 68. Independent experts appointed for this task shall meet
the criteria outlined in Article 68(2).

3.  For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Commission may request access to the
general-purpose AI model concerned through APIs or further appropriate
technical means and tools, including source code.

4.  The request for access shall state the legal basis, the purpose and
reasons of the request and set the period within which the access is to be
provided, and the fines provided for in Article 101 for failure to provide
access.

5.  The providers of the general-purpose AI model concerned or its
representative shall supply the information requested. In the case of legal
persons, companies or firms, or where the provider has no legal personality,
the persons authorised to represent them by law or by their statutes, shall
provide the access requested on behalf of the provider of the general-purpose
AI model concerned.

6.  The Commission shall adopt implementing acts setting out the detailed
arrangements and the conditions for the evaluations, including the detailed
arrangements for involving independent experts, and the procedure for the
selection thereof. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with
the examination procedure referred to in Article 98(2).

7.  Prior to requesting access to the general-purpose AI model concerned, the
AI Office may initiate a structured dialogue with the provider of the general-
purpose AI model to gather more information on the internal testing of the
model, internal safeguards for preventing systemic risks, and other internal
procedures and measures the provider has taken to mitigate such risks.

Article 93

Power to request measures

1.  Where necessary and appropriate, the Commission may request providers to:

(a)   take appropriate measures to comply with the obligations set out in Articles 53 and 54;  
  
(b)   implement mitigation measures, where the evaluation carried out in accordance with Article 92 has given rise to serious and substantiated concern of a systemic risk at Union level;  
  
(c)   restrict the making available on the market, withdraw or recall the model.  
  
  
2.  Before a measure is requested, the AI Office may initiate a structured
dialogue with the provider of the general-purpose AI model.

3.  If, during the structured dialogue referred to in paragraph 2, the
provider of the general-purpose AI model with systemic risk offers commitments
to implement mitigation measures to address a systemic risk at Union level,
the Commission may, by decision, make those commitments binding and declare
that there are no further grounds for action.

Article 94

Procedural rights of economic operators of the general-purpose AI model

Article 18 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the
providers of the general-purpose AI model, without prejudice to more specific
procedural rights provided for in this Regulation.

CHAPTER X

CODES OF CONDUCT AND GUIDELINES

Article 95

Codes of conduct for voluntary application of specific requirements

1.  The AI Office and the Member States shall encourage and facilitate the
drawing up of codes of conduct, including related governance mechanisms,
intended to foster the voluntary application to AI systems, other than high-
risk AI systems, of some or all of the requirements set out in Chapter III,
Section 2 taking into account the available technical solutions and industry
best practices allowing for the application of such requirements.

2.  The AI Office and the Member States shall facilitate the drawing up of
codes of conduct concerning the voluntary application, including by deployers,
of specific requirements to all AI systems, on the basis of clear objectives
and key performance indicators to measure the achievement of those objectives,
including elements such as, but not limited to:

(a)   applicable elements provided for in Union ethical guidelines for trustworthy AI;  
  
(b)   assessing and minimising the impact of AI systems on environmental sustainability, including as regards energy-efficient programming and techniques for the efficient design, training and use of AI;  
  
(c)   promoting AI literacy, in particular that of persons dealing with the development, operation and use of AI;  
  
(d)   facilitating an inclusive and diverse design of AI systems, including through the establishment of inclusive and diverse development teams and the promotion of stakeholders’ participation in that process;  
  
(e)   assessing and preventing the negative impact of AI systems on vulnerable persons or groups of vulnerable persons, including as regards accessibility for persons with a disability, as well as on gender equality.  
  
  
3.  Codes of conduct may be drawn up by individual providers or deployers of
AI systems or by organisations representing them or by both, including with
the involvement of any interested stakeholders and their representative
organisations, including civil society organisations and academia. Codes of
conduct may cover one or more AI systems taking into account the similarity of
the intended purpose of the relevant systems.

4.  The AI Office and the Member States shall take into account the specific
interests and needs of SMEs, including start-ups, when encouraging and
facilitating the drawing up of codes of conduct.

Article 96

Guidelines from the Commission on the implementation of this Regulation

1.  The Commission shall develop guidelines on the practical implementation of
this Regulation, and in particular on:

(a)   the application of the requirements and obligations referred to in Articles 8 to 15 and in Article 25;  
  
(b)   the prohibited practices referred to in Article 5;  
  
(c)   the practical implementation of the provisions related to substantial modification;  
  
(d)   the practical implementation of transparency obligations laid down in Article 50;  
  
(e)   detailed information on the relationship of this Regulation with the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex I, as well as with other relevant Union law, including as regards consistency in their enforcement;  
  
(f)   the application of the definition of an AI system as set out in Article 3, point (1).  
  
  
When issuing such guidelines, the Commission shall pay particular attention to
the needs of SMEs including start-ups, of local public authorities and of the
sectors most likely to be affected by this Regulation.

The guidelines referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall
take due account of the generally acknowledged state of the art on AI, as well
as of relevant harmonised standards and common specifications that are
referred to in Articles 40 and 41, or of those harmonised standards or
technical specifications that are set out pursuant to Union harmonisation law.

2.  At the request of the Member States or the AI Office, or on its own
initiative, the Commission shall update guidelines previously adopted when
deemed necessary.
